Apollo, a poor humble swain,
    As I seem now. Their transformations
    Were never for a piece of beauty rarer,
    Nor in a way so chaste, since my desires
    Run not before mine honour, nor my lusts
    Burn hotter than my faith.
  PERDITA. O, but, sir,
    Your resolution cannot hold when 'tis
    Oppos'd, as it must be, by th' pow'r of the King.
    One of these two must be necessities,
    Which then will speak, that you must change this purpose,
    Or I my life.
  FLORIZEL. Thou dearest Perdita,
    With these forc'd thoughts, I prithee, darken not
    The mirth o' th' feast. Or I'll be thine, my fair,
    Or not my father's; for I cannot be
    Mine own, nor anything to any, if
    I be not thine. To this I am most constant,
    Though destiny say no. Be merry, gentle;
    Strangle such thoughts as these with any thing
    That you behold the while. Your guests are coming.
    Lift up your countenance, as it were the day
    Of celebration of that nuptial which
    We two have sworn shall come.
  PERDITA. O Lady Fortune,
    Stand you auspicious!
  FLORIZEL. See, your guests approach.
    Address yourself to entertain them sprightly,
    And let's be red with mirth.

        Enter SHEPHERD, with POLIXENES and CAMILLO, disguised;
                 CLOWN, MOPSA, DORCAS, with OTHERS

  SHEPHERD. Fie, daughter! When my old wife liv'd, upon
    This day she was both pantler, butler, cook;
    Both dame and servant; welcom'd all; serv'd all;
    Would sing her song and dance her turn; now here
    At upper end o' th' table, now i' th' middle;
    On his shoulder, and his; her face o' fire
    With labour, and the thing she took to quench it
    She would to each one sip. You are retired,
    As if you were a feasted one, and not
    The hostess of the meeting. Pray you bid
    These unknown friends to's welcome, for it is
    A way to make us better friends, more known.
    Come, quench your blushes, and present yourself
    That which you are, Mistress o' th' Feast. Come on,
    And bid us welcome to your sheep-shearing,
    As your good flock shall prosper.
  PERDITA.  [To POLIXENES]  Sir, welcome.
    It is my father's will I should take on me
    The hostess-ship o' th' day.  [To CAMILLO]
    You're welcome, sir.
    Give me those flow'rs there, Dorcas. Reverend sirs,
    For you there's rosemary and rue; these keep
    Seeming and savour all the winter long.
    Grace and remembrance be to you both!
    And welcome to our shearing.
  POLIXENES. Shepherdess-
    A fair one are you- well you fit our ages
    With flow'rs of winter.
  PERDITA. Sir, the year growing ancient,
    Not yet on summer's death nor on the birth
    Of trembling winter, the fairest flow'rs o' th' season
    Are our carnations and streak'd gillyvors,
    Which some call nature's bastards. Of that kind
    Our rustic garden's barren; and I care not
    To get slips of them.
  POLIXENES. Wherefore, gentle maiden,
    Do you neglect them?
  PERDITA. For I have heard it said
    There is an art which in their piedness shares
    With great creating nature.
  POLIXENES. Say there be;
    Yet nature is made better by no mean
    But nature makes that mean; so over that art
    Which you say adds to nature, is an art
    That nature makes. You see, sweet maid, we marry
    A gentler scion to the wildest stock,
    And make conceive a bark of baser kind
    By bud of nobler race. This is an art
    Which does mend nature- change it rather; but
    The art itself is nature.
  PERDITA. So it is.
  POLIXENES. Then make your garden rich in gillyvors,
    And do not call them bastards.
  PERDITA. I'll not put
    The dibble in earth to set one slip of them;
    No more than were I painted I would wish
    This youth should say 'twere well, and only therefore
    Desire to breed by me. Here's flow'rs for you:
    Hot lavender, mints, savory, marjoram;
    The marigold, that goes to bed wi' th' sun,
    And with him rises weeping; these are flow'rs
    Of middle summer, and I think they are given
    To men of middle age. Y'are very welcome.
  CAMILLO. I should leave grazing, were I of your flock,
    And only live by gazing.
  PERDITA. Out, alas!
    You'd be so lean that blasts of January
    Would blow you through and through. Now, my fair'st friend,
    I would I had some flow'rs o' th' spring that might
    Become your time of day- and yours, and yours,
    That wear upon your virgin branches yet
    Your maidenheads growing. O Proserpina,
    From the flowers now that, frighted, thou let'st fall
    From Dis's waggon!- daffodils,
    That come before the swallow dares, and take
    The winds of March with beauty; violets, dim
    But sweeter than the lids of Juno's eyes
    Or Cytherea's breath; pale primroses,
    That die unmarried ere they can behold
    Bright Phoebus in his strength- a malady
    Most incident to maids; bold oxlips, and
    The crown-imperial; lilies of all kinds,
    The flow'r-de-luce being one. O, these I lack
    To make you garlands of, and my sweet friend
    To strew him o'er and o'er!
  FLORIZEL. What, like a corse?
  PERDITA. No; like a bank for love to lie and play on;
    Not like a corse; or if- not to be buried,
    But quick, and in mine arms. Come, take your flow'rs.
    Methinks I play as I have seen them do
    In Whitsun pastorals. Sure, this robe of mine
    Does change my disposition.
  FLORIZEL. What you do
    Still betters what is done. When you speak, sweet,
    I'd have you do it ever. When you sing,
    I'd have you buy and sell so; so give alms;
    Pray so; and, for the ord'ring your affairs,
    To sing them too. When you do dance, I wish you
    A wave o' th' sea, that you might ever do
    Nothing but that; move still, still so,
    And own no other function. Each your doing,
    So singular in each particular,
    Crowns what you are doing in the present deeds,
    That all your acts are queens.
  PERDITA. O Doricles,
    Your praises are too large. But that your youth,
    And the true blood which peeps fairly through't,
    Do plainly give you out an unstain'd shepherd,
    With wisdom I might fear, my Doricles,
    You woo'd me the false way.
  FLORIZEL. I think you have
    As little skill to fear as I have purpose
    To put you to't. But, come; our dance, I pray.
    Your hand, my Perdita; so turtles pair
    That never mean to part.
  PERDITA. I'll swear for 'em.
  POLIXENES. This is the prettiest low-born lass that ever
    Ran on the green-sward; nothing she does or seems
    But smacks of something greater than herself,
    Too noble for this place.
  CAMILLO. He tells her something
    That makes her blood look out. Good sooth, she is
    The queen of curds and cream.
  CLOWN. Come on, strike up.
  DORCAS. Mopsa must be your mistress; marry, garlic,
    To mend her kissing with!
  MOPSA. Now, in good time!
  CLOWN. Not a word, a word; we stand upon our manners.
    Come, strike up.                                     [Music]

          Here a dance Of SHEPHERDS and SHEPHERDESSES

  POLIXENES. Pray, good shepherd, what fair swain is this
    Which dances with your daughter?
  SHEPHERD. They call him Doricles, and boasts himself
    To have a worthy feeding; but I have it
    Upon his own report, and I believe it:
    He looks like sooth. He says he loves my daughter;
    I think so too; for never gaz'd the moon
    Upon the water as he'll stand and read,
    As 'twere my daughter's eyes; and, to be plain,
    I think there is not half a kiss to choose
    Who loves another best.
  POLIXENES. She dances featly.
  SHEPHERD. So she does any thing; though I report it
    That should be silent. If young Doricles
    Do light upon her, she shall bring him that
    Which he not dreams of.

                      Enter a SERVANT

  SERVANT. O master, if you did but hear the pedlar at the door, you
    would never dance again after a tabor and pipe; no, the bagpipe
    could not move you. He sings several tunes faster than you'll
    tell money; he utters them as he had eaten ballads, and all men's
    ears grew to his tunes.
  CLOWN. He could never come better; he shall come in. I love a
    ballad but even too well, if it be doleful matter merrily set
    down, or a very pleasant thing indeed and sung lamentably.
  SERVANT. He hath songs for man or woman of all sizes; no milliner
    can so fit his customers with gloves. He has the prettiest
    love-songs for maids; so without bawdry, which is strange; with
    such delicate burdens of dildos and fadings, 'jump her and thump
    her'; and where some stretch-mouth'd rascal would, as it were,
    mean mischief, and break a foul gap into the matter, he makes the
    maid to answer 'Whoop, do me no harm, good man'- puts him off,
    slights him, with 'Whoop, do me no harm, good man.'
  POLIXENES. This is a brave fellow.
  CLOWN. Believe me, thou talkest of an admirable conceited fellow.
    Has he any unbraided wares?
  SERVANT. He hath ribbons of all the colours i' th' rainbow; points,
    more than all the lawyers in Bohemia can learnedly handle, though
    they come to him by th' gross; inkles, caddisses, cambrics,
    lawns. Why he sings 'em over as they were gods or goddesses; you
    would think a smock were she-angel, he so chants to the
    sleeve-hand and the work about the square on't.
  CLOWN. Prithee bring him in; and let him approach singing.
  PERDITA. Forewarn him that he use no scurrilous words in's tunes.
                                                    Exit SERVANT
  CLOWN. You have of these pedlars that have more in them than you'd
    think, sister.
  PERDITA. Ay, good brother, or go about to think.

                   Enter AUTOLYCUS, Singing

           Lawn as white as driven snow;
           Cypress black as e'er was crow;
           Gloves as sweet as damask roses;
           Masks for faces and for noses;
           Bugle bracelet, necklace amber,
           Perfume for a lady's chamber;
           Golden quoifs and stomachers,
           For my lads to give their dears;
           Pins and poking-sticks of steel-
           What maids lack from head to heel.
           Come, buy of me, come; come buy, come buy;
           Buy, lads, or else your lasses cry.
           Come, buy.

  CLOWN. If I were not in love with Mopsa, thou shouldst take no
    money of me; but being enthrall'd as I am, it will also be the
    bondage of certain ribbons and gloves.
  MOPSA. I was promis'd them against the feast; but they come not too
    late now.
  DORCAS. He hath promis'd you more than that, or there be liars.
  MOPSA. He hath paid you all he promis'd you. May be he has paid you
    more, which will shame you to give him again.
  CLOWN. Is there no manners left among maids? Will they wear their
    plackets where they should bear their faces? Is there not
    milking-time, when you are going to bed, or kiln-hole, to whistle
    off these secrets, but you must be tittle-tattling before all our
    guests? 'Tis well they are whisp'ring. Clammer your tongues, and
    not a word more.
  MOPSA. I have done. Come, you promis'd me a tawdry-lace, and a pair
    of sweet gloves.
  CLOWN. Have I not told thee how I was cozen'd by the way, and lost
    all my money?
  AUTOLYCUS. And indeed, sir, there are cozeners abroad; therefore it
    behoves men to be wary.
  CLOWN. Fear not thou, man; thou shalt lose nothing here.
  AUTOLYCUS. I hope so, sir; for I have about me many parcels of
    charge.
  CLOWN. What hast here? Ballads?
  MOPSA. Pray now, buy some. I love a ballad in print a-life, for
    then we are sure they are true.
  AUTOLYCUS. Here's one to a very doleful tune: how a usurer's wife
    was brought to bed of twenty money-bags at a burden, and how she
    long'd to eat adders' heads and toads carbonado'd.
  MOPSA. Is it true, think you?
  AUTOLYCUS. Very true, and but a month old.
  DORCAS. Bless me from marrying a usurer!
  AUTOLYCUS. Here's the midwife's name to't, one Mistress Taleporter,
    and five or six honest wives that were present. Why should I
    carry lies abroad?
  MOPSA. Pray you now, buy it.
  CLOWN. Come on, lay it by; and let's first see moe ballads; we'll
    buy the other things anon.
  AUTOLYCUS. Here's another ballad, of a fish that appeared upon the
    coast on Wednesday the fourscore of April, forty thousand fathom
    above water, and sung this ballad against the hard hearts of
    maids. It was thought she was a woman, and was turn'd into a cold
    fish for she would not exchange flesh with one that lov'd her.
    The ballad is very pitiful, and as true.
  DORCAS. Is it true too, think you?
  AUTOLYCUS. Five justices' hands at it; and witnesses more than my
    pack will hold.
  CLOWN. Lay it by too. Another.
  AUTOLYCUS. This is a merry ballad, but a very pretty one.
  MOPSA. Let's have some merry ones.
  AUTOLYCUS. Why, this is a passing merry one, and goes to the tune
    of 'Two maids wooing a man.' There's scarce a maid westward but
    she sings it; 'tis in request, I can tell you.
  MOPSA. can both sing it. If thou'lt bear a part, thou shalt hear;
    'tis in three parts.
  DORCAS. We had the tune on't a month ago.
  AUTOLYCUS. I can bear my part; you must know 'tis my occupation.
    Have at it with you.

                        SONG

  AUTOLYCUS. Get you hence, for I must go
             Where it fits not you to know.
  DORCAS.    Whither?
  MOPSA.       O, whither?
  DORCAS.        Whither?
  MOPSA.     It becomes thy oath full well
             Thou to me thy secrets tell.
  DORCAS.    Me too! Let me go thither
  MOPSA.     Or thou goest to th' grange or mill.
  DORCAS.    If to either, thou dost ill.
  AUTOLYCUS. Neither.
  DORCAS.    What, neither?
  AUTOLYCUS. Neither.
  DORCAS.    Thou hast sworn my love to be.
  MOPSA.     Thou hast sworn it more to me.
             Then whither goest? Say, whither?

  CLOWN. We'll have this song out anon by ourselves; my father and
    the gentlemen are in sad talk, and we'll not trouble them. Come,
    bring away thy pack after me. Wenches, I'll buy for you both.
    Pedlar, let's have the first choice. Follow me, girls.
                                      Exit with DORCAS and MOPSA
  AUTOLYCUS. And you shall pay well for 'em.
                                         Exit AUTOLYCUS, Singing

             Will you buy any tape,
             Or lace for your cape,
           My dainty duck, my dear-a?
             Any silk, any thread,
             Any toys for your head,
           Of the new'st and fin'st, fin'st wear-a?
             Come to the pedlar;
             Money's a meddler
           That doth utter all men's ware-a.

                   Re-enter SERVANT

  SERVANT. Master, there is three carters, three shepherds, three
    neat-herds, three swineherds, that have made themselves all men
    of hair; they call themselves Saltiers, and they have dance which
    the wenches say is a gallimaufry of gambols, because they are not
    in't; but they themselves are o' th' mind, if it be not too rough
    for some that know little but bowling, it will please
    plentifully.
  SHEPHERD. Away! We'll none on't; here has been too much homely
    foolery already. I know, sir, we weary you.
  POLIXENES. You weary those that refresh us. Pray, let's see these
    four threes of herdsmen.
  SERVANT. One three of them, by their own report, sir, hath danc'd
    before the King; and not the worst of the three but jumps twelve
    foot and a half by th' squier.
  SHEPHERD. Leave your prating; since these good men are pleas'd, let
    them come in; but quickly now.
  SERVANT. Why, they stay at door, sir.                     Exit

                    Here a dance of twelve SATYRS

  POLIXENES.  [To SHEPHERD]  O, father, you'll know more of that
      hereafter.
    [To CAMILLO]  Is it not too far gone? 'Tis time to part them.
    He's simple and tells much.  [To FLORIZEL]  How now, fair
      shepherd!
    Your heart is full of something that does take
    Your mind from feasting. Sooth, when I was young
    And handed love as you do, I was wont
    To load my she with knacks; I would have ransack'd
    The pedlar's silken treasury and have pour'd it
    To her acceptance: you have let him go
    And nothing marted with him. If your lass
    Interpretation should abuse and call this
    Your lack of love or bounty, you were straited
    For a reply, at least if you make a care
    Of happy holding her.
  FLORIZEL. Old sir, I know
    She prizes not such trifles as these are.
    The gifts she looks from me are pack'd and lock'd
    Up in my heart, which I have given already,
    But not deliver'd. O, hear me breathe my life
    Before this ancient sir, whom, it should seem,
    Hath sometime lov'd. I take thy hand- this hand,
    As soft as dove's down and as white as it,
    Or Ethiopian's tooth, or the fann'd snow that's bolted
    By th' northern blasts twice o'er.
  POLIXENES. What follows this?
    How prettily the young swain seems to wash
    The hand was fair before! I have put you out.
    But to your protestation; let me hear
    What you profess.
  FLORIZEL. Do, and be witness to't.
  POLIXENES. And this my neighbour too?
  FLORIZEL. And he, and more
    Than he, and men- the earth, the heavens, and all:
    That, were I crown'd the most imperial monarch,
    Thereof most worthy, were I the fairest youth
    That ever made eye swerve, had force and knowledge
    More than was ever man's, I would not prize them
    Without her love; for her employ them all;
    Commend them and condemn them to her service
    Or to their own perdition.
  POLIXENES. Fairly offer'd.
  CAMILLO. This shows a sound affection.
  SHEPHERD. But, my daughter,
    Say you the like to him?
  PERDITA. I cannot speak
    So well, nothing so well; no, nor mean better.
    By th' pattern of mine own thoughts I cut out
    The purity of his.
  SHEPHERD. Take hands, a bargain!
    And, friends unknown, you shall bear witness to't:
    I give my daughter to him, and will make
    Her portion equal his.
  FLORIZEL. O, that must be
    I' th' virtue of your daughter. One being dead,
    I shall have more than you can dream of yet;
    Enough then for your wonder. But come on,
    Contract us fore these witnesses.
  SHEPHERD. Come, your hand;
    And, daughter, yours.
  POLIXENES. Soft, swain, awhile, beseech you;
    Have you a father?
  FLORIZEL. I have, but what of him?
  POLIXENES. Knows he of this?
  FLORIZEL. He neither does nor shall.
  POLIXENES. Methinks a father
    Is at the nuptial of his son a guest
    That best becomes the table. Pray you, once more,
    Is not your father grown incapable
    Of reasonable affairs? Is he not stupid
    With age and alt'ring rheums? Can he speak, hear,
    Know man from man, dispute his own estate?
    Lies he not bed-rid, and again does nothing
    But what he did being childish?
  FLORIZEL. No, good sir;
    He has his health, and ampler strength indeed
    Than most have of his age.
  POLIXENES. By my white beard,
    You offer him, if this be so, a wrong
    Something unfilial. Reason my son
    Should choose himself a wife; but as good reason
    The father- all whose joy is nothing else
    But fair posterity- should hold some counsel
    In such a business.
  FLORIZEL. I yield all this;
    But, for some other reasons, my grave sir,
    Which 'tis not fit you know, I not acquaint
    My father of this business.
  POLIXENES. Let him know't.
  FLORIZEL. He shall not.
  POLIXENES. Prithee let him.
  FLORIZEL. No, he must not.
  SHEPHERD. Let him, my son; he shall not need to grieve
    At knowing of thy choice.
  FLORIZEL. Come, come, he must not.
    Mark our contract.
  POLIXENES.  [Discovering himself]  Mark your divorce, young sir,
    Whom son I dare not call; thou art too base
    To be acknowledg'd- thou a sceptre's heir,
    That thus affects a sheep-hook! Thou, old traitor,
    I am sorry that by hanging thee I can but
    Shorten thy life one week. And thou, fresh piece
    Of excellent witchcraft, who of force must know
    The royal fool thou cop'st with-
  SHEPHERD. O, my heart!
  POLIXENES. I'll have thy beauty scratch'd with briers and made
    More homely than thy state. For thee, fond boy,
    If I may ever know thou dost but sigh
    That thou no more shalt see this knack- as never
    I mean thou shalt- we'll bar thee from succession;
    Not hold thee of our blood, no, not our kin,
    Farre than Deucalion off. Mark thou my words.
    Follow us to the court. Thou churl, for this time,
    Though full of our displeasure, yet we free thee
    From the dead blow of it. And you, enchantment,
    Worthy enough a herdsman- yea, him too
    That makes himself, but for our honour therein,
    Unworthy thee- if ever henceforth thou
    These rural latches to his entrance open,
    Or hoop his body more with thy embraces,
    I will devise a death as cruel for thee
    As thou art tender to't.                                Exit
  PERDITA. Even here undone!
    I was not much afeard; for once or twice
    I was about to speak and tell him plainly
    The self-same sun that shines upon his court
    Hides not his visage from our cottage, but
    Looks on alike.  [To FLORIZEL]  Will't please you, sir, be gone?
    I told you what would come of this. Beseech you,
    Of your own state take care. This dream of mine-
    Being now awake, I'll queen it no inch farther,
    But milk my ewes and weep.
  CAMILLO. Why, how now, father!
    Speak ere thou diest.
  SHEPHERD. I cannot speak nor think,
    Nor dare to know that which I know.  [To FLORIZEL]  O sir,
    You have undone a man of fourscore-three
    That thought to fill his grave in quiet, yea,
    To die upon the bed my father died,
    To lie close by his honest bones; but now
    Some hangman must put on my shroud and lay me
    Where no priest shovels in dust. [To PERDITA] O cursed wretch,
    That knew'st this was the Prince, and wouldst adventure
    To mingle faith with him!- Undone, undone!
    If I might die within this hour, I have liv'd
    To die when I desire.                                   Exit
  FLORIZEL. Why look you so upon me?
    I am but sorry, not afeard; delay'd,
    But nothing alt'red. What I was, I am:
    More straining on for plucking back; not following
    My leash unwillingly.
  CAMILLO. Gracious, my lord,
    You know your father's temper. At this time
    He will allow no speech- which I do guess
    You do not purpose to him- and as hardly
    Will he endure your sight as yet, I fear;
    Then, till the fury of his Highness settle,
    Come not before him.
  FLORIZEL. I not purpose it.
    I think Camillo?
  CAMILLO. Even he, my lord.
  PERDITA. How often have I told you 'twould be thus!
    How often said my dignity would last
    But till 'twere known!
  FLORIZEL. It cannot fail but by
    The violation of my faith; and then
    Let nature crush the sides o' th' earth together
    And mar the seeds within! Lift up thy looks.
    From my succession wipe me, father; I
    Am heir to my affection.
  CAMILLO. Be advis'd.
  FLORIZEL. I am- and by my fancy; if my reason
    Will thereto be obedient, I have reason;
    If not, my senses, better pleas'd with madness,
    Do bid it welcome.
  CAMILLO. This is desperate, sir.
  FLORIZEL. So call it; but it does fulfil my vow:
    I needs must think it honesty. Camillo,
    Not for Bohemia, nor the pomp that may
    Be thereat glean'd, for all the sun sees or
    The close earth wombs, or the profound seas hides
    In unknown fathoms, will I break my oath
    To this my fair belov'd. Therefore, I pray you,
    As you have ever been my father's honour'd friend,
    When he shall miss me- as, in faith, I mean not
    To see him any more- cast your good counsels
    Upon his passion. Let myself and Fortune
    Tug for the time to come. This you may know,
    And so deliver: I am put to sea
    With her who here I cannot hold on shore.
    And most opportune to her need I have
    A vessel rides fast by, but not prepar'd
    For this design. What course I mean to hold
    Shall nothing benefit your knowledge, nor
    Concern me the reporting.
  CAMILLO. O my lord,
    I would your spirit were easier for advice.
    Or stronger for your need.
  FLORIZEL. Hark, Perdita.                     [Takes her aside]
    [To CAMILLO]  I'll hear you by and by.
  CAMILLO. He's irremovable,
    Resolv'd for flight. Now were I happy if
    His going I could frame to serve my turn,
    Save him from danger, do him love and honour,
    Purchase the sight again of dear Sicilia
    And that unhappy king, my master, whom
    I so much thirst to see.
  FLORIZEL. Now, good Camillo,
    I am so fraught with curious business that
    I leave out ceremony.
  CAMILLO. Sir, I think
    You have heard of my poor services i' th' love
    That I have borne your father?
  FLORIZEL. Very nobly
    Have you deserv'd. It is my father's music
    To speak your deeds; not little of his care
    To have them recompens'd as thought on.
  CAMILLO. Well, my lord,
    If you may please to think I love the King,
    And through him what's nearest to him, which is
    Your gracious self, embrace but my direction.
    If your more ponderous and settled project
    May suffer alteration, on mine honour,
    I'll point you where you shall have such receiving
    As shall become your Highness; where you may
    Enjoy your mistress, from the whom, I see,
    There's no disjunction to be made but by,
    As heavens forfend! your ruin- marry her;
    And with my best endeavours in your absence
    Your discontenting father strive to qualify,
    And bring him up to liking.
  FLORIZEL. How, Camillo,
    May this, almost a miracle, be done?
    That I may call thee something more than man,
    And after that trust to thee.
  CAMILLO. Have you thought on
    A place whereto you'll go?
  FLORIZEL. Not any yet;
    But as th' unthought-on accident is guilty
    To what we wildly do, so we profess
    Ourselves to be the slaves of chance and flies
    Of every wind that blows.
  CAMILLO. Then list to me.
    This follows, if you will not change your purpose
    But undergo this flight: make for Sicilia,
    And there present yourself and your fair princess-
    For so, I see, she must be- fore Leontes.
    She shall be habited as it becomes
    The partner of your bed. Methinks I see
    Leontes opening his free arms and weeping
    His welcomes forth; asks thee there 'Son, forgiveness!'
    As 'twere i' th' father's person; kisses the hands
    Of your fresh princess; o'er and o'er divides him
    'Twixt his unkindness and his kindness- th' one
    He chides to hell, and bids the other grow
    Faster than thought or time.
  FLORIZEL. Worthy Camillo,
    What colour for my visitation shall I
    Hold up before him?
  CAMILLO. Sent by the King your father
    To greet him and to give him comforts. Sir,
    The manner of your bearing towards him, with
    What you as from your father shall deliver,
    Things known betwixt us three, I'll write you down;
    The which shall point you forth at every sitting
    What you must say, that he shall not perceive
    But that you have your father's bosom there
    And speak his very heart.
  FLORIZEL. I am bound to you.
    There is some sap in this.
  CAMILLO. A course more promising
    Than a wild dedication of yourselves
    To unpath'd waters, undream'd shores, most certain
    To miseries enough; no hope to help you,
    But as you shake off one to take another;
    Nothing so certain as your anchors, who
    Do their best office if they can but stay you
    Where you'll be loath to be. Besides, you know
    Prosperity's the very bond of love,
    Whose fresh complexion and whose heart together
    Affliction alters.
  PERDITA. One of these is true:
    I think affliction may subdue the cheek,
    But not take in the mind.
  CAMILLO. Yea, say you so?
    There shall not at your father's house these seven years
    Be born another such.
  FLORIZEL. My good Camillo,
    She is as forward of her breeding as
    She is i' th' rear o' our birth.
  CAMILLO. I cannot say 'tis pity
    She lacks instructions, for she seems a mistress
    To most that teach.
  PERDITA. Your pardon, sir; for this
    I'll blush you thanks.
  FLORIZEL. My prettiest Perdita!
    But, O, the thorns we stand upon! Camillo-
    Preserver of my father, now of me;
    The medicine of our house- how shall we do?
    We are not furnish'd like Bohemia's son;
    Nor shall appear in Sicilia.
  CAMILLO. My lord,
    Fear none of this. I think you know my fortunes
    Do all lie there. It shall be so my care
    To have you royally appointed as if
    The scene you play were mine. For instance, sir,
    That you may know you shall not want- one word.
                                               [They talk aside]

                     Re-enter AUTOLYCUS

  AUTOLYCUS. Ha, ha! what a fool Honesty is! and Trust, his sworn
  brother, a very simple gentleman! I have sold all my trumpery; not a
  counterfeit stone, not a ribbon, glass, pomander, brooch, table-book,
  ballad, knife, tape, glove, shoe-tie, bracelet, horn-ring, to keep my
  pack from fasting. They throng who should buy first, as if my
  trinkets had been hallowed and brought a benediction to the buyer; by
  which means I saw whose purse was best in picture; and what I saw, to
  my good use I rememb'red. My clown, who wants but something to be a
  reasonable man, grew so in love with the wenches' song that he would
  not stir his pettitoes till he had both tune and words, which so drew
  the rest of the herd to me that all their other senses stuck in ears.
  You might have pinch'd a placket, it was senseless; 'twas nothing to
  geld a codpiece of a purse; I would have fil'd keys off that hung in
  chains. No hearing, no feeling, but my sir's song, and admiring the
  nothing of it. So that in this time of lethargy I pick'd and cut most
  of their festival purses; and had not the old man come in with
  whoobub against his daughter and the King's son and scar'd my choughs
  from the chaff, I had not left a purse alive in the whole army.

              CAMILLO, FLORIZEL, and PERDITA come forward

  CAMILLO. Nay, but my letters, by this means being there
    So soon as you arrive, shall clear that doubt.
  FLORIZEL. And those that you'll procure from King Leontes?
  CAMILLO. Shall satisfy your father.
  PERDITA. Happy be you!
    All that you speak shows fair.
  CAMILLO.  [seeing AUTOLYCUS]  Who have we here?
    We'll make an instrument of this; omit
    Nothing may give us aid.
  AUTOLYCUS.  [Aside]  If they have overheard me now- why, hanging.
  CAMILLO. How now, good fellow! Why shak'st thou so?
    Fear not, man; here's no harm intended to thee.
  AUTOLYCUS. I am a poor fellow, sir.
  CAMILLO. Why, be so still; here's nobody will steal that from thee.
    Yet for the outside of thy poverty we must make an exchange;
    therefore discase thee instantly- thou must think there's a
    necessity in't- and change garments with this gentleman. Though
    the pennyworth on his side be the worst, yet hold thee, there's
    some boot.  [Giving money]
  AUTOLYCUS. I am a poor fellow, sir.  [Aside]  I know ye well
    enough.
  CAMILLO. Nay, prithee dispatch. The gentleman is half flay'd
    already.
  AUTOLYCUS. Are you in camest, sir?  [Aside]  I smell the trick
    on't.
  FLORIZEL. Dispatch, I prithee.
  AUTOLYCUS. Indeed, I have had earnest; but I cannot with conscience
    take it.
  CAMILLO. Unbuckle, unbuckle.

             FLORIZEL and AUTOLYCUS exchange garments

    Fortunate mistress- let my prophecy
    Come home to ye!- you must retire yourself
    Into some covert; take your sweetheart's hat
    And pluck it o'er your brows, muffle your face,
    Dismantle you, and, as you can, disliken
    The truth of your own seeming, that you may-
    For I do fear eyes over- to shipboard
    Get undescried.
  PERDITA. I see the play so lies
    That I must bear a part.
  CAMILLO. No remedy.
    Have you done there?
  FLORIZEL. Should I now meet my father,
    He would not call me son.
  CAMILLO. Nay, you shall have no hat.
                                          [Giving it to PERDITA]
    Come, lady, come. Farewell, my friend.
  AUTOLYCUS. Adieu, sir.
  FLORIZEL. O Perdita, what have we twain forgot!
    Pray you a word.                       [They converse apart]
  CAMILLO.  [Aside]  What I do next shall be to tell the King
    Of this escape, and whither they are bound;
    Wherein my hope is I shall so prevail
    To force him after; in whose company
    I shall re-view Sicilia, for whose sight
    I have a woman's longing.
  FLORIZEL. Fortune speed us!
    Thus we set on, Camillo, to th' sea-side.
  CAMILLO. The swifter speed the better.
                           Exeunt FLORIZEL, PERDITA, and CAMILLO
  AUTOLYCUS. I understand the business, I hear it. To have an open
    ear, a quick eye, and a nimble hand, is necessary for a
    cut-purse; a good nose is requisite also, to smell out work for
    th' other senses. I see this is the time that the unjust man doth
    thrive. What an exchange had this been without boot! What a boot
    is here with this exchange! Sure, the gods do this year connive
    at us, and we may do anything extempore. The Prince himself is
    about a piece of iniquity- stealing away from his father with his
    clog at his heels. If I thought it were a piece of honesty to
    acquaint the King withal, I would not do't. I hold it the more
    knavery to conceal it; and therein am I constant to my
    profession.

                   Re-enter CLOWN and SHEPHERD

    Aside, aside- here is more matter for a hot brain. Every lane's
    end, every shop, church, session, hanging, yields a careful man
    work.
  CLOWN. See, see; what a man you are now! There is no other way but to
  tell the King she's a changeling and none of your flesh and blood.
  SHEPHERD. Nay, but hear me.
  CLOWN. Nay- but hear me.
  SHEPHERD. Go to, then.
  CLOWN. She being none of your flesh and blood, your flesh and blood
  has not offended the King; and so your flesh and blood is not to be
  punish'd by him. Show those things you found about her, those secret
  things- all but what she has with her. This being done, let the law
  go whistle; I warrant you.
  SHEPHERD. I will tell the King all, every word- yea, and his son's
  pranks too; who, I may say, is no honest man, neither to his father
  nor to me, to go about to make me the King's brother-in-law.
  CLOWN. Indeed, brother-in-law was the farthest off you could have
  been to him; and then your blood had been the dearer by I know how
  much an ounce.
  AUTOLYCUS.  [Aside]  Very wisely, puppies!
  SHEPHERD. Well, let us to the King. There is that in this fardel will
  make him scratch his beard.
  AUTOLYCUS.  [Aside]  I know not what impediment this complaint may be
  to the flight of my master.
  CLOWN. Pray heartily he be at palace.
  AUTOLYCUS.  [Aside]  Though I am not naturally honest, I am so
  sometimes by chance. Let me pocket up my pedlar's excrement. [Takes
  off his false beard]  How now, rustics! Whither are you bound?
  SHEPHERD. To th' palace, an it like your worship.
  AUTOLYCUS. Your affairs there, what, with whom, the condition of that
  fardel, the place of your dwelling, your names, your ages, of what
  having, breeding, and anything that is fitting to be known- discover.
  CLOWN. We are but plain fellows, sir.
  AUTOLYCUS. A lie: you are rough and hairy. Let me have no lying; it
  becomes none but tradesmen, and they often give us soldiers the lie;
  but we pay them for it with stamped coin, not stabbing steel;
  therefore they do not give us the lie.
  CLOWN. Your worship had like to have given us one, if you had not
  taken yourself with the manner.
  SHEPHERD. Are you a courtier, an't like you, sir?
  AUTOLYCUS. Whether it like me or no, I am a courtier. Seest thou not
  the air of the court in these enfoldings? Hath not my gait in it the
  measure of the court? Receives not thy nose court-odour from me?
  Reflect I not on thy baseness court-contempt? Think'st thou, for that
  I insinuate, that toaze from thee thy business, I am therefore no
  courtier? I am courtier cap-a-pe, and one that will either push on or
  pluck back thy business there; whereupon I command the to open thy
  affair.
  SHEPHERD. My business, sir, is to the King.
  AUTOLYCUS. What advocate hast thou to him?
  SHEPHERD. I know not, an't like you.
  CLOWN. Advocate's the court-word for a pheasant; say you have none.
  SHEPHERD. None, sir; I have no pheasant, cock nor hen.
  AUTOLYCUS. How blessed are we that are not simple men! Yet nature
  might have made me as these are, Therefore I will not disdain.
  CLOWN. This cannot be but a great courtier.
  SHEPHERD. His garments are rich, but he wears them not handsomely.
  CLOWN. He seems to be the more noble in being fantastical. A great
  man, I'll warrant; I know by the picking on's teeth.
  AUTOLYCUS. The fardel there? What's i' th' fardel? Wherefore that
  box?
  SHEPHERD. Sir, there lies such secrets in this fardel and box which
  none must know but the King; and which he shall know within this
  hour, if I may come to th' speech of him.
  AUTOLYCUS. Age, thou hast lost thy labour.
  SHEPHERD. Why, Sir?
  AUTOLYCUS. The King is not at the palace; he is gone aboard a new
  ship to purge melancholy and air himself; for, if thou be'st capable
  of things serious, thou must know the King is full of grief.
  SHEPHERD. So 'tis said, sir- about his son, that should have married
  a shepherd's daughter.
  AUTOLYCUS. If that shepherd be not in hand-fast, let him fly; the
  curses he shall have, the tortures he shall feel, will break the back
  of man, the heart of monster.
  CLOWN. Think you so, sir?
  AUTOLYCUS. Not he alone shall suffer what wit can make heavy and
  vengeance bitter; but those that are germane to him, though remov'd
  fifty times, shall all come under the hangman- which, though it be
  great pity, yet it is necessary. An old sheep-whistling rogue, a
  ram-tender, to offer to have his daughter come into grace! Some say
  he shall be ston'd; but that death is too soft for him, say I. Draw
  our throne into a sheep-cote!- all deaths are too few, the sharpest
  too easy.
  CLOWN. Has the old man e'er a son, sir, do you hear, an't like you,
    sir?
  AUTOLYCUS. He has a son- who shall be flay'd alive; then 'nointed
  over with honey, set on the head of a wasp's nest; then stand till he
  be three quarters and a dram dead; then recover'd again with
  aqua-vitae or some other hot infusion; then, raw as he is, and in the
  hottest day prognostication proclaims, shall he be set against a
  brick wall, the sun looking with a southward eye upon him, where he
  is to behold him with flies blown to death. But what talk we of these
  traitorly rascals, whose miseries are to be smil'd at, their offences
  being so capital? Tell me, for you seem to be honest plain men, what
  you have to the King. Being something gently consider'd, I'll bring
  you where he is aboard, tender your persons to his presence, whisper
  him in your behalfs; and if it be in man besides the King to effect
  your suits, here is man shall do it.
  CLOWN. He seems to be of great authority. Close with him, give him
  gold; and though authority be a stubborn bear, yet he is oft led by
  the nose with gold. Show the inside of your purse to the outside of
  his hand, and no more ado. Remember- ston'd and flay'd alive.
  SHEPHERD. An't please you, sir, to undertake the business for us,
  here is that gold I have. I'll make it as much more, and leave this
  young man in pawn till I bring it you.
  AUTOLYCUS. After I have done what I promised?
  SHEPHERD. Ay, sir.
  AUTOLYCUS. Well, give me the moiety. Are you a party in this
  business?
  CLOWN. In some sort, sir; but though my case be a pitiful one, I hope
  I shall not be flay'd out of it.
  AUTOLYCUS. O, that's the case of the shepherd's son! Hang him, he'll
  be made an example.
  CLOWN. Comfort, good comfort! We must to the King and show our
  strange sights. He must know 'tis none of your daughter nor my
  sister; we are gone else. Sir, I will give you as much as this old
  man does, when the business is performed; and remain, as he says,
  your pawn till it be brought you.
  AUTOLYCUS. I will trust you. Walk before toward the sea-side; go on
  the right-hand; I will but look upon the hedge, and follow you.
  CLOWN. We are blest in this man, as I may say, even blest.
  SHEPHERD. Let's before, as he bids us. He was provided to do us good.
  Exeunt SHEPHERD and CLOWN
  AUTOLYCUS. If I had a mind to be honest, I see Fortune would not
  suffer me: she drops booties in my mouth. I am courted now with a
  double occasion- gold, and a means to do the Prince my master good;
  which who knows how that may turn back to my advancement? I will
  bring these two moles, these blind ones, aboard him. If he think it
  fit to shore them again, and that the complaint they have to the King
  concerns him nothing, let him call me rogue for being so far
  officious; for I am proof against that title, and what shame else
  belongs to't. To him will I present them. There may be matter in it.
  Exit

ACT V. SCENE I. Sicilia. The palace of LEONTES

Enter LEONTES, CLEOMENES, DION, PAULINA, and OTHERS

  CLEOMENES. Sir, you have done enough, and have perform'd
    A saint-like sorrow. No fault could you make
    Which you have not redeem'd; indeed, paid down
    More penitence than done trespass. At the last,
    Do as the heavens have done: forget your evil;
    With them forgive yourself.
  LEONTES. Whilst I remember
    Her and her virtues, I cannot forget
    My blemishes in them, and so still think of
    The wrong I did myself; which was so much
    That heirless it hath made my kingdom, and
    Destroy'd the sweet'st companion that e'er man
    Bred his hopes out of.
  PAULINA. True, too true, my lord.
    If, one by one, you wedded all the world,
    Or from the all that are took something good
    To make a perfect woman, she you kill'd
    Would be unparallel'd.
  LEONTES. I think so. Kill'd!
    She I kill'd! I did so; but thou strik'st me
    Sorely, to say I did. It is as bitter
    Upon thy tongue as in my thought. Now, good now,
    Say so but seldom.
  CLEOMENES. Not at all, good lady.
    You might have spoken a thousand things that would
    Have done the time more benefit, and grac'd
    Your kindness better.
  PAULINA. You are one of those
    Would have him wed again.
  DION. If you would not so,
    You pity not the state, nor the remembrance
    Of his most sovereign name; consider little
    What dangers, by his Highness' fail of issue,
    May drop upon his kingdom and devour
    Incertain lookers-on. What were more holy
    Than to rejoice the former queen is well?
    What holier than, for royalty's repair,
    For present comfort, and for future good,
    To bless the bed of majesty again
    With a sweet fellow to't?
  PAULINA. There is none worthy,
    Respecting her that's gone. Besides, the gods
    Will have fulfill'd their secret purposes;
    For has not the divine Apollo said,
    Is't not the tenour of his oracle,
    That King Leontes shall not have an heir
    Till his lost child be found? Which that it shall,
    Is all as monstrous to our human reason
    As my Antigonus to break his grave
    And come again to me; who, on my life,
    Did perish with the infant. 'Tis your counsel
    My lord should to the heavens be contrary,
    Oppose against their wills.  [To LEONTES]  Care not for issue;
    The crown will find an heir. Great Alexander
    Left his to th' worthiest; so his successor
    Was like to be the best.
  LEONTES. Good Paulina,
    Who hast the memory of Hermione,
    I know, in honour, O that ever I
    Had squar'd me to thy counsel! Then, even now,
    I might have look'd upon my queen's full eyes,
    Have taken treasure from her lips-
  PAULINA. And left them
    More rich for what they yielded.
  LEONTES. Thou speak'st truth.
    No more such wives; therefore, no wife. One worse,
    And better us'd, would make her sainted spirit
    Again possess her corpse, and on this stage,
    Where we offend her now, appear soul-vex'd,
    And begin 'Why to me'-
  PAULINA. Had she such power,
    She had just cause.
  LEONTES. She had; and would incense me
    To murder her I married.
  PAULINA. I should so.
    Were I the ghost that walk'd, I'd bid you mark
    Her eye, and tell me for what dull part in't
    You chose her; then I'd shriek, that even your ears
    Should rift to hear me; and the words that follow'd
    Should be 'Remember mine.'
  LEONTES. Stars, stars,
    And all eyes else dead coals! Fear thou no wife;
    I'll have no wife, Paulina.
  PAULINA. Will you swear
    Never to marry but by my free leave?
  LEONTES. Never, Paulina; so be blest my spirit!
  PAULINA. Then, good my lords, bear witness to his oath.
  CLEOMENES. You tempt him over-much.
  PAULINA. Unless another,
    As like Hermione as is her picture,
    Affront his eye.
  CLEOMENES. Good madam-
  PAULINA. I have done.
    Yet, if my lord will marry- if you will, sir,
    No remedy but you will- give me the office
    To choose you a queen. She shall not be so young
    As was your former; but she shall be such
    As, walk'd your first queen's ghost, it should take joy
    To see her in your arms.
  LEONTES. My true Paulina,
    We shall not marry till thou bid'st us.
  PAULINA. That
    Shall be when your first queen's again in breath;
    Never till then.

                       Enter a GENTLEMAN

  GENTLEMAN. One that gives out himself Prince Florizel,
    Son of Polixenes, with his princess- she
    The fairest I have yet beheld- desires access
    To your high presence.
  LEONTES. What with him? He comes not
    Like to his father's greatness. His approach,
    So out of circumstance and sudden, tells us
    'Tis not a visitation fram'd, but forc'd
    By need and accident. What train?
  GENTLEMAN. But few,
    And those but mean.
  LEONTES. His princess, say you, with him?
  GENTLEMAN. Ay; the most peerless piece of earth, I think,
    That e'er the sun shone bright on.
  PAULINA. O Hermione,
    As every present time doth boast itself
    Above a better gone, so must thy grave
    Give way to what's seen now! Sir, you yourself
    Have said and writ so, but your writing now
    Is colder than that theme: 'She had not been,
    Nor was not to be equall'd.' Thus your verse
    Flow'd with her beauty once; 'tis shrewdly ebb'd,
    To say you have seen a better.
  GENTLEMAN. Pardon, madam.
    The one I have almost forgot- your pardon;
    The other, when she has obtain'd your eye,
    Will have your tongue too. This is a creature,
    Would she begin a sect, might quench the zeal
    Of all professors else, make proselytes
    Of who she but bid follow.
  PAULINA. How! not women?
  GENTLEMAN. Women will love her that she is a woman
    More worth than any man; men, that she is
    The rarest of all women.
  LEONTES. Go, Cleomenes;
    Yourself, assisted with your honour'd friends,
    Bring them to our embracement.                        Exeunt
    Still, 'tis strange
    He thus should steal upon us.
  PAULINA. Had our prince,
    Jewel of children, seen this hour, he had pair'd
    Well with this lord; there was not full a month
    Between their births.
  LEONTES. Prithee no more; cease. Thou know'st
    He dies to me again when talk'd of. Sure,
    When I shall see this gentleman, thy speeches
    Will bring me to consider that which may
    Unfurnish me of reason.

         Re-enter CLEOMENES, with FLORIZEL, PERDITA, and
                            ATTENDANTS

    They are come.
    Your mother was most true to wedlock, Prince;
    For she did print your royal father off,
    Conceiving you. Were I but twenty-one,
    Your father's image is so hit in you
    His very air, that I should call you brother,
    As I did him, and speak of something wildly
    By us perform'd before. Most dearly welcome!
    And your fair princess- goddess! O, alas!
    I lost a couple that 'twixt heaven and earth
    Might thus have stood begetting wonder as
    You, gracious couple, do. And then I lost-
    All mine own folly- the society,
    Amity too, of your brave father, whom,
    Though bearing misery, I desire my life
    Once more to look on him.
  FLORIZEL. By his command
    Have I here touch'd Sicilia, and from him
    Give you all greetings that a king, at friend,
    Can send his brother; and, but infirmity,
    Which waits upon worn times, hath something seiz'd
    His wish'd ability, he had himself
    The lands and waters 'twixt your throne and his
    Measur'd, to look upon you; whom he loves,
    He bade me say so, more than all the sceptres
    And those that bear them living.
  LEONTES. O my brother-
    Good gentleman!- the wrongs I have done thee stir
    Afresh within me; and these thy offices,
    So rarely kind, are as interpreters
    Of my behind-hand slackness! Welcome hither,
    As is the spring to th' earth. And hath he too
    Expos'd this paragon to th' fearful usage,
    At least ungentle, of the dreadful Neptune,
    To greet a man not worth her pains, much less
    Th' adventure of her person?
  FLORIZEL. Good, my lord,
    She came from Libya.
  LEONTES. Where the warlike Smalus,
    That noble honour'd lord, is fear'd and lov'd?
  FLORIZEL. Most royal sir, from thence; from him whose daughter
    His tears proclaim'd his, parting with her; thence,
    A prosperous south-wind friendly, we have cross'd,
    To execute the charge my father gave me
    For visiting your Highness. My best train
    I have from your Sicilian shores dismiss'd;
    Who for Bohemia bend, to signify
    Not only my success in Libya, sir,
    But my arrival and my wife's in safety
    Here where we are.
  LEONTES. The blessed gods
    Purge all infection from our air whilst you
    Do climate here! You have a holy father,
    A graceful gentleman, against whose person,
    So sacred as it is, I have done sin,
    For which the heavens, taking angry note,
    Have left me issueless; and your father's blest,
    As he from heaven merits it, with you,
    Worthy his goodness. What might I have been,
    Might I a son and daughter now have look'd on,
    Such goodly things as you!

                      Enter a LORD

  LORD. Most noble sir,
    That which I shall report will bear no credit,
    Were not the proof so nigh. Please you, great sir,
    Bohemia greets you from himself by me;
    Desires you to attach his son, who has-
    His dignity and duty both cast off-
    Fled from his father, from his hopes, and with
    A shepherd's daughter.
  LEONTES. Where's Bohemia? Speak.
  LORD. Here in your city; I now came from him.
    I speak amazedly; and it becomes
    My marvel and my message. To your court
    Whiles he was hast'ning- in the chase, it seems,
    Of this fair couple- meets he on the way
    The father of this seeming lady and
    Her brother, having both their country quitted
    With this young prince.
  FLORIZEL. Camillo has betray'd me;
    Whose honour and whose honesty till now
    Endur'd all weathers.
  LORD. Lay't so to his charge;
    He's with the King your father.
  LEONTES. Who? Camillo?
  LORD. Camillo, sir; I spake with him; who now
    Has these poor men in question. Never saw I
    Wretches so quake. They kneel, they kiss the earth;
    Forswear themselves as often as they speak.
    Bohemia stops his ears, and threatens them
    With divers deaths in death.
  PERDITA. O my poor father!
    The heaven sets spies upon us, will not have
    Our contract celebrated.
  LEONTES. You are married?
  FLORIZEL. We are not, sir, nor are we like to be;
    The stars, I see, will kiss the valleys first.
    The odds for high and low's alike.
  LEONTES. My lord,
    Is this the daughter of a king?
  FLORIZEL. She is,
    When once she is my wife.
  LEONTES. That 'once,' I see by your good father's speed,
    Will come on very slowly. I am sorry,
    Most sorry, you have broken from his liking
    Where you were tied in duty; and as sorry
    Your choice is not so rich in worth as beauty,
    That you might well enjoy her.
  FLORIZEL. Dear, look up.
    Though Fortune, visible an enemy,
    Should chase us with my father, pow'r no jot
    Hath she to change our loves. Beseech you, sir,
    Remember since you ow'd no more to time
    Than I do now. With thought of such affections,
    Step forth mine advocate; at your request
    My father will grant precious things as trifles.
  LEONTES. Would he do so, I'd beg your precious mistress,
    Which he counts but a trifle.
  PAULINA. Sir, my liege,
    Your eye hath too much youth in't. Not a month
    Fore your queen died, she was more worth such gazes
    Than what you look on now.
  LEONTES. I thought of her
    Even in these looks I made.  [To FLORIZEL]  But your petition
    Is yet unanswer'd. I will to your father.
    Your honour not o'erthrown by your desires,
    I am friend to them and you. Upon which errand
    I now go toward him; therefore, follow me,
    And mark what way I make. Come, good my lord.         Exeunt

SCENE II. Sicilia. Before the palace of LEONTES

Enter AUTOLYCUS and a GENTLEMAN

  AUTOLYCUS. Beseech you, sir, were you present at this relation?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. I was by at the opening of the fardel, heard the
    old shepherd deliver the manner how he found it; whereupon, after
    a little amazedness, we were all commanded out of the chamber;
    only this, methought I heard the shepherd say he found the child.
  AUTOLYCUS. I would most gladly know the issue of it.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. I make a broken delivery of the business; but the
    changes I perceived in the King and Camillo were very notes of
    admiration. They seem'd almost, with staring on one another, to
    tear the cases of their eyes; there was speech in their dumbness,
    language in their very gesture; they look'd as they had heard of
    a world ransom'd, or one destroyed. A notable passion of wonder
    appeared in them; but the wisest beholder that knew no more but
    seeing could not say if th' importance were joy or sorrow- but in
    the extremity of the one it must needs be.

                    Enter another GENTLEMAN

    Here comes a gentleman that happily knows more. The news, Rogero?
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. Nothing but bonfires. The oracle is fulfill'd:
    the King's daughter is found. Such a deal of wonder is broken out
    within this hour that ballad-makers cannot be able to express it.

                    Enter another GENTLEMAN

    Here comes the Lady Paulina's steward; he can deliver you more. How
    goes it now, sir? This news, which is call'd true, is so like an
    old tale that the verity of it is in strong suspicion. Has the King
    found his heir?
  THIRD GENTLEMAN. Most true, if ever truth were pregnant by
  circumstance. That which you hear you'll swear you see, there is such
  unity in the proofs. The mantle of Queen Hermione's; her jewel about
  the neck of it; the letters of Antigonus found with it, which they
  know to be his character; the majesty of the creature in resemblance
  of the mother; the affection of nobleness which nature shows above
  her breeding; and many other evidences- proclaim her with all
  certainty to be the King's daughter. Did you see the meeting of the
  two kings?
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. No.
  THIRD GENTLEMAN. Then you have lost a sight which was to be seen,
  cannot be spoken of. There might you have beheld one joy crown
  another, so and in such manner that it seem'd sorrow wept to take
  leave of them; for their joy waded in tears. There was casting up of
  eyes, holding up of hands, with countenance of such distraction that
  they were to be known by garment, not by favour. Our king, being
  ready to leap out of himself for joy of his found daughter, as if
  that joy were now become a loss, cries 'O, thy mother, thy mother!'
  then asks Bohemia forgiveness; then embraces his son-in-law; then
  again worries he his daughter with clipping her. Now he thanks the
  old shepherd, which stands by like a weather-bitten conduit of many
  kings' reigns. I never heard of such another encounter, which lames
  report to follow it and undoes description to do it.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. What, pray you, became of Antigonus, that carried
  hence the child?
  THIRD GENTLEMAN. Like an old tale still, which will have matter to
  rehearse, though credit be asleep and not an ear open: he was torn to
  pieces with a bear. This avouches the shepherd's son, who has not
  only his innocence, which seems much, to justify him, but a
  handkerchief and rings of his that Paulina knows.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. What became of his bark and his followers?
  THIRD GENTLEMAN. Wreck'd the same instant of their master's death,
  and in the view of the shepherd; so that all the instruments which
  aided to expose the child were even then lost when it was found. But,
  O, the noble combat that 'twixt joy and sorrow was fought in Paulina!
  She had one eye declin'd for the loss of her husband, another
  elevated that the oracle was fulfill'd. She lifted the Princess from
  the earth, and so locks her in embracing as if she would pin her to
  her heart, that she might no more be in danger of losing.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. The dignity of this act was worth the audience of
  kings and princes; for by such was it acted.
  THIRD GENTLEMAN. One of the prettiest touches of all, and that which
  angl'd for mine eyes- caught the water, though not the fish- was,
  when at the relation of the Queen's death, with the manner how she
  came to't bravely confess'd and lamented by the King, how
  attentivenes wounded his daughter; till, from one sign of dolour to
  another, she did with an 'Alas!'- I would fain say- bleed tears; for
  I am sure my heart wept blood. Who was most marble there changed
  colour; some swooned, all sorrowed. If all the world could have
  seen't, the woe had been universal.
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Are they returned to the court?
  THIRD GENTLEMAN. No. The Princess hearing of her mother's statue,
  which is in the keeping of Paulina- a piece many years in doing and
  now newly perform'd by that rare Italian master, Julio Romano, who,
  had he himself eternity and could put breath into his work, would
  beguile nature of her custom, so perfectly he is her ape. He so near
  to Hermione hath done Hermione that they say one would speak to her
  and stand in hope of answer- thither with all greediness of affection
  are they gone, and there they intend to sup.
  SECOND GENTLEMAN. I thought she had some great matter there in hand;
  for she hath privately twice or thrice a day, ever since the death of
  Hermione, visited that removed house. Shall we thither, and with our
  company piece the rejoicing?
  FIRST GENTLEMAN. Who would be thence that has the benefit of access?
  Every wink of an eye some new grace will be born. Our absence makes
  us unthrifty to our knowledge. Let's along.
                                                Exeunt GENTLEMEN
  AUTOLYCUS. Now, had I not the dash of my former life in me, would
  preferment drop on my head. I brought the old man and his son aboard
  the Prince; told him I heard them talk of a fardel and I know not
  what; but he at that time over-fond of the shepherd's daughter- so he
  then took her to be- who began to be much sea-sick, and himself
  little better, extremity of weather continuing, this mystery remained
  undiscover'd. But 'tis all one to me; for had I been the finder-out
  of this secret, it would not have relish'd among my other discredits.

                    Enter SHEPHERD and CLOWN

    Here come those I have done good to against my will, and already
    appearing in the blossoms of their fortune.
  SHEPHERD. Come, boy; I am past moe children, but thy sons and
    daughters will be all gentlemen born.
  CLOWN. You are well met, sir. You denied to fight with me this
    other day, because I was no gentleman born. See you these
    clothes? Say you see them not and think me still no gentleman
    born. You were best say these robes are not gentlemen born. Give
    me the lie, do; and try whether I am not now a gentleman born.
  AUTOLYCUS. I know you are now, sir, a gentleman born.
  CLOWN. Ay, and have been so any time these four hours.
  SHEPHERD. And so have I, boy.
  CLOWN. So you have; but I was a gentleman born before my father;
    for the King's son took me by the hand and call'd me brother; and
    then the two kings call'd my father brother; and then the Prince,
    my brother, and the Princess, my sister, call'd my father father.
    And so we wept; and there was the first gentleman-like tears that
    ever we shed.
  SHEPHERD. We may live, son, to shed many more.
  CLOWN. Ay; or else 'twere hard luck, being in so preposterous
    estate as we are.
  AUTOLYCUS. I humbly beseech you, sir, to pardon me all the faults I
    have committed to your worship, and to give me your good report
    to the Prince my master.
  SHEPHERD. Prithee, son, do; for we must be gentle, now we are
    gentlemen.
  CLOWN. Thou wilt amend thy life?
  AUTOLYCUS. Ay, an it like your good worship.
  CLOWN. Give me thy hand. I will swear to the Prince thou art as
    honest a true fellow as any is in Bohemia.
  SHEPHERD. You may say it, but not swear it.
  CLOWN. Not swear it, now I am a gentleman? Let boors and franklins
    say it: I'll swear it.
  SHEPHERD. How if it be false, son?
  CLOWN. If it be ne'er so false, a true gentleman may swear it in
    the behalf of his friend. And I'll swear to the Prince thou art a
    tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt not be drunk; but I
    know thou art no tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt be
    drunk. But I'll swear it; and I would thou wouldst be a tall
    fellow of thy hands.
  AUTOLYCUS. I will prove so, sir, to my power.
  CLOWN. Ay, by any means, prove a tall fellow. If I do not wonder
    how thou dar'st venture to be drunk not being a tall fellow,
    trust me not. Hark! the kings and the princes, our kindred, are
    going to see the Queen's picture. Come, follow us; we'll be thy
    good masters.                                         Exeunt

SCENE III. Sicilia. A chapel in PAULINA's house

Enter LEONTES, POLIXENES, FLORIZEL, PERDITA, CAMILLO, PAULINA,
LORDS and ATTENDANTS

  LEONTES. O grave and good Paulina, the great comfort
    That I have had of thee!
  PAULINA. What, sovereign sir,
    I did not well, I meant well. All my services
    You have paid home; but that you have vouchsaf'd,
    With your crown'd brother and these your contracted
    Heirs of your kingdoms, my poor house to visit,
    It is a surplus of your grace, which never
    My life may last to answer.
  LEONTES. O Paulina,
    We honour you with trouble; but we came
    To see the statue of our queen. Your gallery
    Have we pass'd through, not without much content
    In many singularities; but we saw not
    That which my daughter came to look upon,
    The statue of her mother.
  PAULINA. As she liv'd peerless,
    So her dead likeness, I do well believe,
    Excels whatever yet you look'd upon
    Or hand of man hath done; therefore I keep it
    Lonely, apart. But here it is. Prepare
    To see the life as lively mock'd as ever
    Still sleep mock'd death. Behold; and say 'tis well.
                [PAULINA draws a curtain, and discovers HERMIONE
                                         standing like a statue]
    I like your silence; it the more shows off
    Your wonder; but yet speak. First, you, my liege.
    Comes it not something near?
  LEONTES. Her natural posture!
    Chide me, dear stone, that I may say indeed
    Thou art Hermione; or rather, thou art she
    In thy not chiding; for she was as tender
    As infancy and grace. But yet, Paulina,
    Hermione was not so much wrinkled, nothing
    So aged as this seems.
  POLIXENES. O, not by much!
  PAULINA. So much the more our carver's excellence,
    Which lets go by some sixteen years and makes her
    As she liv'd now.
  LEONTES. As now she might have done,
    So much to my good comfort as it is
    Now piercing to my soul. O, thus she stood,
    Even with such life of majesty- warm life,
    As now it coldly stands- when first I woo'd her!
    I am asham'd. Does not the stone rebuke me
    For being more stone than it? O royal piece,
    There's magic in thy majesty, which has
    My evils conjur'd to remembrance, and
    From thy admiring daughter took the spirits,
    Standing like stone with thee!
  PERDITA. And give me leave,
    And do not say 'tis superstition that
    I kneel, and then implore her blessing. Lady,
    Dear queen, that ended when I but began,
    Give me that hand of yours to kiss.
  PAULINA. O, patience!
    The statue is but newly fix'd, the colour's
    Not dry.
  CAMILLO. My lord, your sorrow was too sore laid on,
    Which sixteen winters cannot blow away,
    So many summers dry. Scarce any joy
    Did ever so long live; no sorrow
    But kill'd itself much sooner.
  POLIXENES. Dear my brother,
    Let him that was the cause of this have pow'r
    To take off so much grief from you as he
    Will piece up in himself.
  PAULINA. Indeed, my lord,
    If I had thought the sight of my poor image
    Would thus have wrought you- for the stone is mine-
    I'd not have show'd it.
  LEONTES. Do not draw the curtain.
  PAULINA. No longer shall you gaze on't, lest your fancy
    May think anon it moves.
  LEONTES. Let be, let be.
    Would I were dead, but that methinks already-
    What was he that did make it? See, my lord,
    Would you not deem it breath'd, and that those veins
    Did verily bear blood?
  POLIXENES. Masterly done!
    The very life seems warm upon her lip.
  LEONTES. The fixture of her eye has motion in't,
    As we are mock'd with art.
  PAULINA. I'll draw the curtain.
    My lord's almost so far transported that
    He'll think anon it lives.
  LEONTES. O sweet Paulina,
    Make me to think so twenty years together!
    No settled senses of the world can match
    The pleasure of that madness. Let 't alone.
  PAULINA. I am sorry, sir, I have thus far stirr'd you; but
    I could afflict you farther.
  LEONTES. Do, Paulina;
    For this affliction has a taste as sweet
    As any cordial comfort. Still, methinks,
    There is an air comes from her. What fine chisel
    Could ever yet cut breath? Let no man mock me,
    For I will kiss her.
  PAULINA. Good my lord, forbear.
    The ruddiness upon her lip is wet;
    You'll mar it if you kiss it; stain your own
    With oily painting. Shall I draw the curtain?
  LEONTES. No, not these twenty years.
  PERDITA. So long could I
    Stand by, a looker-on.
  PAULINA. Either forbear,
    Quit presently the chapel, or resolve you
    For more amazement. If you can behold it,
    I'll make the statue move indeed, descend,
    And take you by the hand, but then you'll think-
    Which I protest against- I am assisted
    By wicked powers.
  LEONTES. What you can make her do
    I am content to look on; what to speak
    I am content to hear; for 'tis as easy
    To make her speak as move.
  PAULINA. It is requir'd
    You do awake your faith. Then all stand still;
    Or those that think it is unlawful business
    I am about, let them depart.
  LEONTES. Proceed.
    No foot shall stir.
  PAULINA. Music, awake her: strike.                     [Music]
    'Tis time; descend; be stone no more; approach;
    Strike all that look upon with marvel. Come;
    I'll fill your grave up. Stir; nay, come away.
    Bequeath to death your numbness, for from him
    Dear life redeems you. You perceive she stirs.
                         [HERMIONE comes down from the pedestal]
    Start not; her actions shall be holy as
    You hear my spell is lawful. Do not shun her
    Until you see her die again; for then
    You kill her double. Nay, present your hand.
    When she was young you woo'd her; now in age
    Is she become the suitor?
  LEONTES. O, she's warm!
    If this be magic, let it be an art
    Lawful as eating.
  POLIXENES. She embraces him.
  CAMILLO. She hangs about his neck.
    If she pertain to life, let her speak too.
  POLIXENES. Ay, and make it manifest where she has liv'd,
    Or how stol'n from the dead.
  PAULINA. That she is living,
    Were it but told you, should be hooted at
    Like an old tale; but it appears she lives
    Though yet she speak not. Mark a little while.
    Please you to interpose, fair madam. Kneel,
    And pray your mother's blessing. Turn, good lady;
    Our Perdita is found.
  HERMIONE. You gods, look down,
    And from your sacred vials pour your graces
    Upon my daughter's head! Tell me, mine own,
    Where hast thou been preserv'd? Where liv'd? How found
    Thy father's court? For thou shalt hear that I,
    Knowing by Paulina that the oracle
    Gave hope thou wast in being, have preserv'd
    Myself to see the issue.
  PAULINA. There's time enough for that,
    Lest they desire upon this push to trouble
    Your joys with like relation. Go together,
    You precious winners all; your exultation
    Partake to every one. I, an old turtle,
    Will wing me to some wither'd bough, and there
    My mate, that's never to be found again,
    Lament till I am lost.
  LEONTES. O peace, Paulina!
    Thou shouldst a husband take by my consent,
    As I by thine a wife. This is a match,
    And made between's by vows. Thou hast found mine;
    But how, is to be question'd; for I saw her,
    As I thought, dead; and have, in vain, said many
    A prayer upon her grave. I'll not seek far-
    For him, I partly know his mind- to find thee
    An honourable husband. Come, Camillo,
    And take her by the hand whose worth and honesty
    Is richly noted, and here justified
    By us, a pair of kings. Let's from this place.
    What! look upon my brother. Both your pardons,
    That e'er I put between your holy looks
    My ill suspicion. This your son-in-law,
    And son unto the King, whom heavens directing,
    Is troth-plight to your daughter. Good Paulina,
    Lead us from hence where we may leisurely
    Each one demand and answer to his part
    Perform'd in this wide gap of time since first
    We were dissever'd. Hastily lead away.                Exeunt





A LOVERS COMPLAINT



From off a hill whose concave womb reworded
A plaintful story from a sistring vale,
My spirits tattend this double voice accorded,
And down I laid to list the sad-tund tale;
Ere long espied a fickle maid full pale,
Tearing of papers, breaking rings a-twain,
Storming her world with sorrows wind and rain.

Upon her head a platted hive of straw,
Which fortified her visage from the sun,
Whereon the thought might think sometime it saw
The carcass of a beauty spent and done;
Time had not scythed all that youth begun,
Nor youth all quit, but spite of heavens fell rage
Some beauty peeped through lattice of seard age.

Oft did she heave her napkin to her eyne,
Which on it had conceited characters,
Laundring the silken figures in the brine
That seasoned woe had pelleted in tears,
And often reading what contents it bears;
As often shrieking undistinguishd woe,
In clamours of all size, both high and low.

Sometimes her levelld eyes their carriage ride,
As they did battry to the spheres intend;
Sometime diverted their poor balls are tied
To thorbed earth; sometimes they do extend
Their view right on; anon their gazes lend
To every place at once, and nowhere fixd,
The mind and sight distractedly commixd.

Her hair, nor loose nor tied in formal plat,
Proclaimd in her a careless hand of pride;
For some untuckd descended her sheavd hat,
Hanging her pale and pined cheek beside;
Some in her threaden fillet still did bide,
And, true to bondage, would not break from thence,
Though slackly braided in loose negligence.

A thousand favours from a maund she drew,
Of amber, crystal, and of beaded jet,
Which one by one she in a river threw,
Upon whose weeping margent she was set,
Like usury applying wet to wet,
Or monarchs hands, that lets not bounty fall
Where want cries some, but where excess begs all.

Of folded schedules had she many a one,
Which she perusd, sighd, tore and gave the flood;
Crackd many a ring of posied gold and bone,
Bidding them find their sepulchres in mud;
Found yet mo letters sadly pennd in blood,
With sleided silk, feat and affectedly
Enswathd, and seald to curious secrecy.

These often bathd she in her fluxive eyes,
And often kissd, and often gave to tear;
Cried, O false blood, thou register of lies,
What unapproved witness dost thou bear!
Ink would have seemd more black and damned here!
This said, in top of rage the lines she rents,
Big discontent so breaking their contents.

A reverend man that grazed his cattle nigh,
Sometime a blusterer, that the ruffle knew
Of court, of city, and had let go by
The swiftest hours observed as they flew,
Towards this afflicted fancy fastly drew;
And, privilegd by age, desires to know
In brief the grounds and motives of her woe.

So slides he down upon his grained bat,
And comely distant sits he by her side,
When he again desires her, being sat,
Her grievance with his hearing to divide:
If that from him there may be aught applied
Which may her suffering ecstasy assuage,
Tis promised in the charity of age.

Father, she says, though in me you behold
The injury of many a blasting hour,
Let it not tell your judgement I am old,
Not age, but sorrow, over me hath power.
I might as yet have been a spreading flower,
Fresh to myself, if I had self-applied
Love to myself, and to no love beside.

But woe is me! Too early I attended
A youthful suit; it was to gain my grace;
O one by natures outwards so commended,
That maidens eyes stuck over all his face,
Love lackd a dwelling and made him her place;
And when in his fair parts she did abide,
She was new lodgd and newly deified.

His browny locks did hang in crooked curls,
And every light occasion of the wind
Upon his lips their silken parcels hurls,
Whats sweet to do, to do will aptly find,
Each eye that saw him did enchant the mind:
For on his visage was in little drawn,
What largeness thinks in paradise was sawn.

Small show of man was yet upon his chin;
His phoenix down began but to appear,
Like unshorn velvet, on that termless skin,
Whose bare out-braggd the web it seemed to wear.
Yet showd his visage by that cost more dear,
And nice affections wavering stood in doubt
If best were as it was, or best without.

His qualities were beauteous as his form,
For maiden-tongued he was, and thereof free;
Yet if men movd him, was he such a storm
As oft twixt May and April is to see,
When winds breathe sweet, unruly though they be.
His rudeness so with his authorizd youth
Did livery falseness in a pride of truth.

Well could he ride, and often men would say
That horse his mettle from his rider takes,
Proud of subjection, noble by the sway,
What rounds, what bounds, what course, what stop he makes!
And controversy hence a question takes,
Whether the horse by him became his deed,
Or he his manage by th well-doing steed.

But quickly on this side the verdict went,
His real habitude gave life and grace
To appertainings and to ornament,
Accomplishd in himself, not in his case;
All aids, themselves made fairer by their place,
Came for additions; yet their purposd trim
Piecd not his grace, but were all gracd by him.

So on the tip of his subduing tongue
All kind of arguments and question deep,
All replication prompt, and reason strong,
For his advantage still did wake and sleep,
To make the weeper laugh, the laugher weep:
He had the dialect and different skill,
Catching all passions in his craft of will.

That he did in the general bosom reign
Of young, of old, and sexes both enchanted,
To dwell with him in thoughts, or to remain
In personal duty, following where he haunted,
Consents bewitchd, ere he desire, have granted,
And dialogued for him what he would say,
Askd their own wills, and made their wills obey.

Many there were that did his picture get
To serve their eyes, and in it put their mind,
Like fools that in th imagination set
The goodly objects which abroad they find
Of lands and mansions, theirs in thought assignd,
And labouring in moe pleasures to bestow them,
Than the true gouty landlord which doth owe them.

So many have, that never touchd his hand,
Sweetly supposd them mistress of his heart.
My woeful self that did in freedom stand,
And was my own fee-simple (not in part)
What with his art in youth, and youth in art,
Threw my affections in his charmed power,
Reservd the stalk and gave him all my flower.

Yet did I not, as some my equals did,
Demand of him, nor being desired yielded,
Finding myself in honour so forbid,
With safest distance I mine honour shielded.
Experience for me many bulwarks builded
Of proofs new-bleeding, which remaind the foil
Of this false jewel, and his amorous spoil.

But ah! Who ever shunnd by precedent
The destind ill she must herself assay,
Or forced examples gainst her own content,
To put the by-passd perils in her way?
Counsel may stop a while what will not stay:
For when we rage, advice is often seen
By blunting us to make our wills more keen.

Nor gives it satisfaction to our blood,
That we must curb it upon others proof,
To be forbode the sweets that seems so good,
For fear of harms that preach in our behoof.
O appetite, from judgement stand aloof!
The one a palate hath that needs will taste,
Though reason weep and cry, It is thy last.

For further I could say, This mans untrue,
And knew the patterns of his foul beguiling;
Heard where his plants in others orchards grew,
Saw how deceits were gilded in his smiling;
Knew vows were ever brokers to defiling;
Thought characters and words merely but art,
And bastards of his foul adulterate heart.

And long upon these terms I held my city,
Till thus he gan besiege me: Gentle maid,
Have of my suffering youth some feeling pity,
And be not of my holy vows afraid:
Thats to ye sworn, to none was ever said,
For feasts of love I have been calld unto,
Till now did neer invite, nor never woo.

All my offences that abroad you see
Are errors of the blood, none of the mind:
Love made them not; with acture they may be,
Where neither party is nor true nor kind,
They sought their shame that so their shame did find,
And so much less of shame in me remains,
By how much of me their reproach contains.

Among the many that mine eyes have seen,
Not one whose flame my heart so much as warmed,
Or my affection put to th smallest teen,
Or any of my leisures ever charmed:
Harm have I done to them, but neer was harmed;
Kept hearts in liveries, but mine own was free,
And reignd commanding in his monarchy.

Look here what tributes wounded fancies sent me,
Of pallid pearls and rubies red as blood,
Figuring that they their passions likewise lent me
Of grief and blushes, aptly understood
In bloodless white and the encrimsond mood;
Effects of terror and dear modesty,
Encampd in hearts, but fighting outwardly.

And, lo! behold these talents of their hair,
With twisted metal amorously empleachd,
I have receivd from many a several fair,
Their kind acceptance weepingly beseechd,
With th annexions of fair gems enrichd,
And deep-braind sonnets that did amplify
Each stones dear nature, worth and quality.

The diamond, why twas beautiful and hard,
Whereto his invisd properties did tend,
The deep green emerald, in whose fresh regard
Weak sights their sickly radiance do amend;
The heaven-hued sapphire and the opal blend
With objects manifold; each several stone,
With wit well blazond smild, or made some moan.

Lo, all these trophies of affections hot,
Of pensivd and subdued desires the tender,
Nature hath chargd me that I hoard them not,
But yield them up where I myself must render,
That is, to you, my origin and ender:
For these of force must your oblations be,
Since I their altar, you empatron me.

O then advance of yours that phraseless hand,
Whose white weighs down the airy scale of praise;
Take all these similes to your own command,
Hallowed with sighs that burning lungs did raise:
What me, your minister for you, obeys,
Works under you; and to your audit comes
Their distract parcels in combined sums.

Lo, this device was sent me from a nun,
Or sister sanctified of holiest note,
Which late her noble suit in court did shun,
Whose rarest havings made the blossoms dote;
For she was sought by spirits of richest coat,
But kept cold distance, and did thence remove
To spend her living in eternal love.

But O, my sweet, what labour ist to leave
The thing we have not, mastring what not strives,
Planing the place which did no form receive,
Playing patient sports in unconstrained gyves,
She that her fame so to herself contrives,
The scars of battle scapeth by the flight,
And makes her absence valiant, not her might.

O pardon me, in that my boast is true,
The accident which brought me to her eye,
Upon the moment did her force subdue,
And now she would the caged cloister fly:
Religious love put out religions eye:
Not to be tempted would she be immurd,
And now to tempt all, liberty procurd.

How mighty then you are, O hear me tell!
The broken bosoms that to me belong
Have emptied all their fountains in my well,
And mine I pour your ocean all among:
I strong oer them, and you oer me being strong,
Must for your victory us all congest,
As compound love to physic your cold breast.

My parts had powr to charm a sacred nun,
Who, disciplind and dieted in grace,
Believd her eyes when they tassail begun,
All vows and consecrations giving place.
O most potential love! Vow, bond, nor space,
In thee hath neither sting, knot, nor confine,
For thou art all and all things else are thine.

When thou impressest, what are precepts worth
Of stale example? When thou wilt inflame,
How coldly those impediments stand forth,
Of wealth, of filial fear, law, kindred, fame!
Loves arms are peace, gainst rule, gainst sense, gainst shame,
And sweetens, in the suffring pangs it bears,
The aloes of all forces, shocks and fears.

Now all these hearts that do on mine depend,
Feeling it break, with bleeding groans they pine,
And supplicant their sighs to your extend,
To leave the battry that you make gainst mine,
Lending soft audience to my sweet design,
And credent soul to that strong-bonded oath,
That shall prefer and undertake my troth.

This said, his watry eyes he did dismount,
Whose sights till then were levelld on my face;
Each cheek a river running from a fount
With brinish current downward flowed apace.
O how the channel to the stream gave grace!
Who, glazd with crystal gate the glowing roses
That flame through water which their hue encloses.

O father, what a hell of witchcraft lies
In the small orb of one particular tear!
But with the inundation of the eyes
What rocky heart to water will not wear?
What breast so cold that is not warmed here?
O cleft effect! Cold modesty, hot wrath,
Both fire from hence and chill extincture hath.

For lo, his passion, but an art of craft,
Even there resolvd my reason into tears;
There my white stole of chastity I daffd,
Shook off my sober guards, and civil fears,
Appear to him as he to me appears,
All melting, though our drops this diffrence bore:
His poisond me, and mine did him restore.

In him a plenitude of subtle matter,
Applied to cautels, all strange forms receives,
Of burning blushes, or of weeping water,
Or swooning paleness; and he takes and leaves,
In eithers aptness, as it best deceives,
To blush at speeches rank, to weep at woes,
Or to turn white and swoon at tragic shows.

That not a heart which in his level came
Could scape the hail of his all-hurting aim,
Showing fair nature is both kind and tame;
And veild in them, did win whom he would maim.
Against the thing he sought he would exclaim;
When he most burned in heart-wishd luxury,
He preachd pure maid, and praisd cold chastity.

Thus merely with the garment of a grace,
The naked and concealed fiend he coverd,
That thunexperient gave the tempter place,
Which, like a cherubin, above them hoverd.
Who, young and simple, would not be so loverd?
Ay me! I fell, and yet do question make
What I should do again for such a sake.

O, that infected moisture of his eye,
O, that false fire which in his cheek so glowd!
O, that forcd thunder from his heart did fly,
O, that sad breath his spongy lungs bestowd,
O, all that borrowed motion, seeming owed,
Would yet again betray the fore-betrayed,
And new pervert a reconciled maid.




THE PASSIONATE PILGRIM

I.

Did not the heavenly rhetoric of thine eye,
'Gainst whom the world could not hold argument,
Persuade my heart to this false perjury?
Vows for thee broke deserve not punishment.
A woman I forswore; but I will prove,
Thou being a goddess, I forswore not thee:
My vow was earthly, thou a heavenly love;
Thy grace being gain'd cures all disgrace in me.
My vow was breath, and breath a vapour is;
Then, thou fair sun, that on this earth doth shine,
Exhale this vapour vow; in thee it is:
If broken, then it is no fault of mine.
  If by me broke, what fool is not so wise
  To break an oath, to win a paradise?

II.

Sweet Cytherea, sitting by a brook
With young Adonis, lovely, fresh, and green,
Did court the lad with many a lovely look,
Such looks as none could look but beauty's queen.
She told him stories to delight his ear;
She show'd him favours to allure his eye;
To win his heart, she touch'd him here and there:
Touches so soft still conquer chastity.
But whether unripe years did want conceit,
Or he refus'd to take her figur'd proffer,
The tender nibbler would not touch the bait,
But smile and jest at every gentle offer:
  Then fell she on her back, fair queen, and toward;
  He rose and ran away; ah, fool too froward!

III.

If love make me forsworn, how shall I swear to love?
O never faith could hold, if not to beauty vow'd:
Though to myself forsworn, to thee I'll constant prove;
Those thoughts, to me like oaks, to thee like osiers bow'd.
Study his bias leaves, and makes his book thine eyes,
Where all those pleasures live that art can comprehend.
If knowledge be the mark, to know thee shall suffice;
Well learned is that tongue that well can thee commend;
All ignorant that soul that sees thee without wonder;
Which is to me some praise, that I thy parts admire:
Thy eye Jove's lightning seems, thy voice his dreadful thunder,
Which (not to anger bent) is music and sweet fire.
  Celestial as thou art, O do not love that wrong,
  To sing heavens' praise with such an earthly tongue.

IV.

Scarce had the sun dried up the dewy morn,
And scarce the herd gone to the hedge for shade,
When Cytherea, all in love forlorn,
A longing tarriance for Adonis made,
Under an osier growing by a brook,
A brook where Adon used to cool his spleen.
Hot was the day; she hotter that did look
For his approach, that often there had been.
Anon he comes, and throws his mantle by,
And stood stark naked on the brook's green brim;
The sun look'd on the world with glorious eye,
Yet not so wistly as this queen on him:
  He, spying her, bounc'd in, whereas he stood;
  O Jove, quoth she, why was not I a flood?

V.

Fair is my love, but not so fair as fickle;
Mild as a dove, but neither true nor trusty;
Brighter than glass, and yet, as glass is, brittle;
Softer than wax, and yet, as iron, rusty:
  A lily pale, with damask die to grace her,
  None fairer, nor none falser to deface her.

Her lips to mine how often hath she join'd,
Between each kiss her oaths of true love swearing!
How many tales to please me hath she coin'd,
Dreading my love, the loss thereof still fearing!
  Yet in the midst of all her pure protestings,
  Her faith, her oaths, her tears, and all were jestings.

She burn'd with love, as straw with fire flameth;
She burn'd out love, as soon as straw outburneth;
She fram'd the love, and yet she foil'd the framing;
She bade love last, and yet she fell a turning.
  Was this a lover, or a lecher whether?
  Bad in the best, though excellent in neither.

VI.

If music and sweet poetry agree,
As they must needs, the sister and the brother,
Then must the love be great 'twixt thee and me,
Because thou lovest the one, and I the other.
Dowland to thee is dear, whose heavenly touch
Upon the lute doth ravish human sense;
Spenser to me, whose deep conceit is such
As, passing all conceit, needs no defence.
Thou lov'st to hear the sweet melodious sound
That Phoebus' lute, the queen of music, makes;
And I in deep delight am chiefly drown'd
Whenas himself to singing he betakes.
  One god is god of both, as poets feign;
  One knight loves both, and both in thee remain.

VII.

Fair was the morn when the fair queen of love,
    *     *     *     *     *     *
Paler for sorrow than her milk-white dove,
For Adon's sake, a youngster proud and wild;
Her stand she takes upon a steep-up hill:
Anon Adonis comes with horn and hounds;
She, silly queen, with more than love's good will,
Forbade the boy he should not pass those grounds;
Once, quoth she, did I see a fair sweet youth
Here in these brakes deep-wounded with a boar,
Deep in the thigh, a spectacle of ruth!
See, in my thigh, quoth she, here was the sore.
  She showed hers: he saw more wounds than one,
  And blushing fled, and left her all alone.

VIII.

Sweet rose, fair flower, untimely pluck'd, soon vaded,
Pluck'd in the bud, and vaded in the spring!
Bright orient pearl, alack! too timely shaded!
Fair creature, kill'd too soon by death's sharp sting!
  Like a green plum that hangs upon a tree,
  And falls, through wind, before the fall should be.

I weep for thee, and yet no cause I have;
For why? thou left'st me nothing in thy will:
And yet thou left'st me more than I did crave;
For why? I craved nothing of thee still:
  O yes, dear friend, I pardon crave of thee,
  Thy discontent thou didst bequeath to me.

IX.

Venus, with young Adonis sitting by her,
Under a myrtle shade, began to woo him:
She told the youngling how god Mars did try her,
And as he fell to her, so fell she to him.
Even thus, quoth she, the warlike god embrac'd me,
And then she clipp'd Adonis in her arms;
Even thus, quoth she, the warlike god unlaced me;
As if the boy should use like loving charms;
Even thus, quoth she, he seized on my lips,
And with her lips on his did act the seizure;
And as she fetched breath, away he skips,
And would not take her meaning nor her pleasure.
  Ah! that I had my lady at this bay,
  To kiss and clip me till I run away!

X.

   Crabbed age and youth
     Cannot live together
   Youth is full of pleasance,
     Age is full of care;
   Youth like summer morn,
     Age like winter weather;
   Youth like summer brave,
     Age like winter bare;
   Youth is full of sport,
   Age's breath is short;
     Youth is nimble, age is lame;
   Youth is hot and bold,
   Age is weak and cold;
     Youth is wild, and age is tame.
   Age, I do abhor thee;
   Youth, I do adore thee;
     O, my love, my love is young!
   Age, I do defy thee;
   O, sweet shepherd, hie thee,
   For methinks thou stay'st too long.

XI.

Beauty is but a vain and doubtful good,
A shining gloss that vadeth suddenly;
A flower that dies when first it 'gins to bud;
A brittle glass, that's broken presently:
  A doubtful good, a gloss, a glass, a flower,
  Lost, vaded, broken, dead within an hour.

And as goods lost are seld or never found,
As vaded gloss no rubbing will refresh,
As flowers dead lie wither'd on the ground,
As broken glass no cement can redress,
  So beauty blemish'd once, for ever's lost,
  In spite of physic, painting, pain and cost.

XII.

Good night, good rest.  Ah! neither be my share:
She bade good night that kept my rest away;
And daff'd me to a cabin hang'd with care,
To descant on the doubts of my decay.
 Farewell, quoth she, and come again tomorrow:
 Fare well I could not, for I supp'd with sorrow;

Yet at my parting sweetly did she smile,
In scorn or friendship, nill I construe whether:
'T may be, she joy'd to jest at my exile,
'T may be, again to make me wander thither:
  'Wander,' a word for shadows like myself,
  As take the pain, but cannot pluck the pelf.

XIII.

Lord, how mine eyes throw gazes to the east!
My heart doth charge the watch; the morning rise
Doth cite each moving sense from idle rest.
Not daring trust the office of mine eyes,
  While Philomela sits and sings, I sit and mark,
  And wish her lays were tuned like the lark;

For she doth welcome daylight with her ditty,
And drives away dark dismal-dreaming night:
The night so pack'd, I post unto my pretty;
Heart hath his hope, and eyes their wished sight;
  Sorrow chang'd to solace, solace mix'd with sorrow;
  For why, she sigh'd and bade me come tomorrow.

Were I with her, the night would post too soon;
But now are minutes added to the hours;
To spite me now, each minute seems a moon;
Yet not for me, shine sun to succour flowers!
  Pack night, peep day; good day, of night now borrow:
  Short, night, to-night, and length thyself to-morrow.



THE PHOENIX AND THE TURTLE



Let the bird of loudest lay,
On the sole Arabian tree,
Herald sad and trumpet be,
To whose sound chaste wings obey.

But thou shrieking harbinger,
Foul precurrer of the fiend,
Augur of the fevers end,
To this troop come thou not near.

From this session interdict
Every fowl of tyrant wing,
Save the eagle, featherd king;
Keep the obsequy so strict.

Let the priest in surplice white,
That defunctive music can,
Be the death-divining swan,
Lest the requiem lack his right.

And thou treble-dated crow,
That thy sable gender makst
With the breath thou givst and takst,
Mongst our mourners shalt thou go.

Here the anthem doth commence:
Love and constancy is dead;
Phoenix and the turtle fled
In a mutual flame from hence.

So they lovd, as love in twain
Had the essence but in one;
Two distincts, division none:
Number there in love was slain.

Hearts remote, yet not asunder;
Distance and no space was seen
Twixt this turtle and his queen;
But in them it were a wonder.

So between them love did shine,
That the turtle saw his right
Flaming in the phoenix sight;
Either was the others mine.

Property was thus appalled,
That the self was not the same;
Single natures double name
Neither two nor one was called.

Reason, in itself confounded,
Saw division grow together;
To themselves yet either neither,
Simple were so well compounded.

That it cried, How true a twain
Seemeth this concordant one!
Love hath reason, reason none,
If what parts can so remain.

Whereupon it made this threne
To the phoenix and the dove,
Co-supremes and stars of love,
As chorus to their tragic scene.


       THRENOS

Beauty, truth, and rarity.
Grace in all simplicity,
Here enclosd in cinders lie.

Death is now the phoenix nest;
And the turtles loyal breast
To eternity doth rest.

Leaving no posterity:
Twas not their infirmity,
It was married chastity.

Truth may seem, but cannot be;
Beauty brag, but tis not she;
Truth and beauty buried be.

To this urn let those repair
That are either true or fair;
For these dead birds sigh a prayer.



THE RAPE OF LUCRECE

                      TO THE

          RIGHT HONOURABLE HENRY WRIOTHESLY,

        EARL OF SOUTHAMPTON, AND BARON OF TITCHFIELD.

THE love I dedicate to your Lordship is without end; whereof this
pamphlet, without beginning, is but a superfluous moiety.  The warrant
I have of your honourable disposition, not the worth of my untutored
lines, makes it assured of acceptance.  What I have done is yours; what
I have to do is yours; being part in all I have, devoted yours.  Were
my worth greater, my duty would show greater; meantime, as it is, it is
bound to your Lordship, to whom I wish long life, still lengthened with
all happiness.

                         Your Lordship's in all duty,
                              WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE.

                        THE ARGUMENT.

LUCIUS TARQUINIUS (for his excessive pride surnamed Superbus), after he
had caused his own father-in-law, Servius Tullius, to be cruelly
murdered, and, contrary to the Roman laws and customs, not requiring or
staying for the people's suffrages, had possessed himself of the
kingdom, went, accompanied with his sons and other noblemen of Rome, to
besiege Ardea.  During which siege the principal men of the army
meeting one evening at the tent of Sextus Tarquinius, the king's son,
in their discourses after supper, every one commended the virtues of
his own wife; among whom Collatinus extolled the incomparable chastity
of his wife Lucretia. In that pleasant humour they all posted to Rome;
and intending, by their secret and sudden arrival, to make trial of
that which every one had before avouched, only Collatinus finds his
wife, though it were late in the night, spinning amongst her maids: the
other ladies were all found dancing and revelling, or in several
disports.  Whereupon the noblemen yielded Collatinus the victory, and
his wife the fame.  At that time Sextus Tarquinius being inflamed with
Lucrece's beauty, yet smothering his passions for the present, departed
with the rest back to the camp; from whence he shortly after privily
withdrew himself, and was (according to his estate) royally entertained
and lodged by Lucrece at Collatium.  The same night he treacherously
stealeth into her chamber, violently ravished her, and early in the
morning speedeth away. Lucrece, in this lamentable plight, hastily
dispatched messengers, one to Rome for her father, another to the camp
for Collatine.  They came, the one accompanied with Junius Brutus, the
other with Publius Valerius; and finding Lucrece attired in mourning
habit, demanded the cause of her sorrow.  She, first taking an oath of
them for her revenge, revealed the actor, and whole manner of his
dealing, and withal suddenly stabbed herself.  Which done, with one
consent they all vowed to root out the whole hated family of the
Tarquins; and bearing the dead body to Rome, Brutus acquainted the
people with the doer and manner of the vile deed, with a bitter
invective against the tyranny of the king; wherewith the people were so
moved, that with one consent and a general acclamation the Tarquins
were all exiled, and the state government changed from kings to
consuls.

_______________________________________________________________

From the besieged Ardea all in post,
Borne by the trustless wings of false desire,
Lust-breathed Tarquin leaves the Roman host,
And to Collatium bears the lightless fire
Which, in pale embers hid, lurks to aspire
  And girdle with embracing flames the waist
  Of Collatine's fair love, Lucrece the chaste.

Haply that name of chaste unhapp'ly set
This bateless edge on his keen appetite;
When Collatine unwisely did not let
To praise the clear unmatched red and white
Which triumph'd in that sky of his delight,
  Where mortal stars, as bright as heaven's beauties,
  With pure aspects did him peculiar duties.

For he the night before, in Tarquin's tent,
Unlock'd the treasure of his happy state;
What priceless wealth the heavens had him lent
In the possession of his beauteous mate;
Reckoning his fortune at such high-proud rate,
  That kings might be espoused to more fame,
  But king nor peer to such a peerless dame.

O happiness enjoy'd but of a few!
And, if possess'd, as soon decay'd and done
As is the morning's silver-melting dew
Against the golden splendour of the sun!
An expir'd date, cancell'd ere well begun:
  Honour and beauty, in the owner's arms,
  Are weakly fortress'd from a world of harms.

Beauty itself doth of itself persuade
The eyes of men without an orator;
What needeth then apologies be made,
To set forth that which is so singular?
Or why is Collatine the publisher
  Of that rich jewel he should keep unknown
  From thievish ears, because it is his own?

Perchance his boast of Lucrece' sovereignty
Suggested this proud issue of a king;
For by our ears our hearts oft tainted be:
Perchance that envy of so rich a thing,
Braving compare, disdainfully did sting
  His high-pitch'd thoughts, that meaner men should vaunt
  That golden hap which their superiors want.

But some untimely thought did instigate
His all-too-timeless speed, if none of those;
His honour, his affairs, his friends, his state,
Neglected all, with swift intent he goes
To quench the coal which in his liver glows.
  O rash false heat, wrapp'd in repentant cold,
  Thy hasty spring still blasts, and ne'er grows old!

When at Collatium this false lord arriv'd,
Well was he welcom'd by the Roman dame,
Within whose face beauty and virtue striv'd
Which of them both should underprop her fame:
When virtue bragg'd, beauty would blush for shame;
  When beauty boasted blushes, in despite
  Virtue would stain that or with silver white.

But beauty, in that white intituled,
From Venus' doves doth challenge that fair field:
Then virtue claims from beauty beauty's red,
Which virtue gave the golden age, to gild
Their silver cheeks, and call'd it then their shield;
  Teaching them thus to use it in the fight,
  When shame assail'd, the red should fence the white.

This heraldry in Lucrece' face was seen,
Argued by beauty's red, and virtue's white:
Of either's colour was the other queen,
Proving from world's minority their right:
Yet their ambition makes them still to fight;
  The sovereignty of either being so great,
  That oft they interchange each other's seat.

Their silent war of lilies and of roses,
Which Tarquin view'd in her fair face's field,
In their pure ranks his traitor eye encloses;
Where, lest between them both it should be kill'd,
The coward captive vanquish'd doth yield
  To those two armies that would let him go,
  Rather than triumph in so false a foe.

Now thinks he that her husband's shallow tongue,
(The niggard prodigal that prais'd her so)
In that high task hath done her beauty wrong,
Which far exceeds his barren skill to show:
Therefore that praise which Collatine doth owe
  Enchanted Tarquin answers with surmise,
  In silent wonder of still-gazing eyes.

This earthly saint, adored by this devil,
Little suspecteth the false worshipper;
For unstain'd thoughts do seldom dream on evil;
Birds never lim'd no secret bushes fear:
So guiltless she securely gives good cheer
  And reverend welcome to her princely guest,
  Whose inward ill no outward harm express'd:

For that he colour'd with his high estate,
Hiding base sin in plaits of majesty;
That nothing in him seem'd inordinate,
Save sometime too much wonder of his eye,
Which, having all, all could not satisfy;
  But, poorly rich, so wanteth in his store,
  That, cloy'd with much, he pineth still for more.

But she, that never cop'd with stranger eyes,
Could pick no meaning from their parling looks,
Nor read the subtle-shining secrecies
Writ in the glassy margents of such books;
She touch'd no unknown baits, nor fear'd no hooks;
  Nor could she moralize his wanton sight,
  More than his eyes were open'd to the light.

He stories to her ears her husband's fame,
Won in the fields of fruitful Italy;
And decks with praises Collatine's high name,
Made glorious by his manly chivalry
With bruised arms and wreaths of victory:
  Her joy with heav'd-up hand she doth express,
  And, wordless, so greets heaven for his success.

Far from the purpose of his coming hither,
He makes excuses for his being there.
No cloudy show of stormy blustering weather
Doth yet in his fair welkin once appear;
Till sable Night, mother of Dread and Fear,
  Upon the world dim darkness doth display,
  And in her vaulty prison stows the day.

For then is Tarquin brought unto his bed,
Intending weariness with heavy spright;
For, after supper, long he questioned
With modest Lucrece, and wore out the night:
Now leaden slumber with life's strength doth fight;
  And every one to rest themselves betake,
  Save thieves, and cares, and troubled minds, that wake.

As one of which doth Tarquin lie revolving
The sundry dangers of his will's obtaining;
Yet ever to obtain his will resolving,
Though weak-built hopes persuade him to abstaining:
Despair to gain doth traffic oft for gaining;
  And when great treasure is the meed propos'd,
  Though death be adjunct, there's no death suppos'd.

Those that much covet are with gain so fond,
For what they have not, that which they possess
They scatter and unloose it from their bond,
And so, by hoping more, they have but less;
Or, gaining more, the profit of excess
  Is but to surfeit, and such griefs sustain,
  That they prove bankrupt in this poor-rich gain.

The aim of all is but to nurse the life
With honour, wealth, and ease, in waning age;
And in this aim there is such thwarting strife,
That one for all, or all for one we gage;
As life for honour in fell battles' rage;
  Honour for wealth; and oft that wealth doth cost
  The death of all, and all together lost.

So that in vent'ring ill we leave to be
The things we are, for that which we expect;
And this ambitious foul infirmity,
In having much, torments us with defect
Of that we have: so then we do neglect
  The thing we have; and, all for want of wit,
  Make something nothing, by augmenting it.

Such hazard now must doting Tarquin make,
Pawning his honour to obtain his lust;
And for himself himself he must forsake:
Then where is truth, if there be no self-trust?
When shall he think to find a stranger just,
  When he himself himself confounds, betrays
  To slanderous tongues and wretched hateful days?

Now stole upon the time the dead of night,
When heavy sleep had closed up mortal eyes:
No comfortable star did lend his light,
No noise but owls' and wolves' death-boding cries;
Now serves the season that they may surprise
  The silly lambs; pure thoughts are dead and still,
  While lust and murder wake to stain and kill.

And now this lustful lord leap'd from his bed,
Throwing his mantle rudely o'er his arm;
Is madly toss'd between desire and dread;
Th' one sweetly flatters, th' other feareth harm;
But honest Fear, bewitch'd with lust's foul charm,
  Doth too too oft betake him to retire,
  Beaten away by brain-sick rude Desire.

His falchion on a flint he softly smiteth,
That from the cold stone sparks of fire do fly;
Whereat a waxen torch forthwith he lighteth,
Which must be lode-star to his lustful eye;
And to the flame thus speaks advisedly:
  'As from this cold flint I enforced this fire,
  So Lucrece must I force to my desire.'

Here pale with fear he doth premeditate
The dangers of his loathsome enterprise,
And in his inward mind he doth debate
What following sorrow may on this arise;
Then looking scornfully, he doth despise
  His naked armour of still-slaughter'd lust,
  And justly thus controls his thoughts unjust:

'Fair torch, burn out thy light, and lend it not
To darken her whose light excelleth thine:
And die, unhallow'd thoughts, before you blot
With your uncleanness that which is divine!
Offer pure incense to so pure a shrine:
  Let fair humanity abhor the deed
  That spots and stains love's modest snow-white weed.

'O shame to knighthood and to shining arms!
O foul dishonour to my household's grave!
O impious act, including all foul harms!
A martial man to be soft fancy's slave!
True valour still a true respect should have;
  Then my digression is so vile, so base,
  That it will live engraven in my face.

'Yea, though I die, the scandal will survive,
And be an eye-sore in my golden coat;
Some loathsome dash the herald will contrive,
To cipher me how fondly I did dote;
That my posterity, sham'd with the note,
  Shall curse my bones, and hold it for no sin
  To wish that I their father had not been.

'What win I, if I gain the thing I seek?
A dream, a breath, a froth of fleeting joy:
Who buys a minute's mirth to wail a week?
Or sells eternity to get a toy?
For one sweet grape who will the vine destroy?
  Or what fond beggar, but to touch the crown,
  Would with the sceptre straight be strucken down?

'If Collatinus dream of my intent,
Will he not wake, and in a desperate rage
Post hither, this vile purpose to prevent?
This siege that hath engirt his marriage,
This blur to youth, this sorrow to the sage,
  This dying virtue, this surviving shame,
  Whose crime will bear an ever-during blame?

'O, what excuse can my invention make
When thou shalt charge me with so black a deed?
Will not my tongue be mute, my frail joints shake?
Mine eyes forego their light, my false heart bleed?
The guilt being great, the fear doth still exceed;
  And extreme fear can neither fight nor fly,
  But, coward-like, with trembling terror die.

'Had Collatinus kill'd my son or sire,
Or lain in ambush to betray my life,
Or were he not my dear friend, this desire
Might have excuse to work upon his wife;
As in revenge or quittal of such strife:
  But as he is my kinsman, my dear friend,
  The shame and fault finds no excuse nor end.

'Shameful it is;ay, if the fact be known:
Hateful it is: there is no hate in loving;
I'll beg her love;but she is not her own;
The worst is but denial and reproving:
My will is strong, past reason's weak removing.
  Who fears a sentence or an old man's saw
  Shall by a painted cloth be kept in awe.'

Thus, graceless, holds he disputation
'Tween frozen conscience and hot-burning will,
And with good thoughts makes dispensation,
Urging the worser sense for vantage still;
Which in a moment doth confound and kill
  All pure effects, and doth so far proceed,
  That what is vile shows like a virtuous deed.

Quoth he, 'She took me kindly by the hand,
And gaz'd for tidings in my eager eyes,
Fearing some hard news from the warlike band,
Where her beloved Collatinus lies.
O how her fear did make her colour rise!
  First red as roses that on lawn we lay,
  Then white as lawn, the roses took away.

'And how her hand, in my hand being lock'd,
Forc'd it to tremble with her loyal fear;
Which struck her sad, and then it faster rock'd,
Until her husband's welfare she did hear;
Whereat she smiled with so sweet a cheer,
  That had Narcissus seen her as she stood,
  Self-love had never drown'd him in the flood.

'Why hunt I then for colour or excuses?
All orators are dumb when beauty pleadeth;
Poor wretches have remorse in poor abuses;
Love thrives not in the heart that shadows dreadeth:
Affection is my captain, and he leadeth;
  And when his gaudy banner is display'd,
  The coward fights and will not be dismay'd.

'Then, childish fear, avaunt! debating, die!
Respect and reason wait on wrinkled age!
My heart shall never countermand mine eye;
Sad pause and deep regard beseem the sage;
My part is youth, and beats these from the stage:
  Desire my pilot is, beauty my prize;
  Then who fears sinking where such treasure lies?'

As corn o'ergrown by weeds, so heedful fear
Is almost chok'd by unresisted lust.
Away he steals with opening, listening ear,
Full of foul hope, and full of fond mistrust;
Both which, as servitors to the unjust,
  So cross him with their opposite persuasion,
  That now he vows a league, and now invasion.

Within his thought her heavenly image sits,
And in the self-same seat sits Collatine:
That eye which looks on her confounds his wits;
That eye which him beholds, as more divine,
Unto a view so false will not incline;
  But with a pure appeal seeks to the heart,
  Which once corrupted takes the worser part;

And therein heartens up his servile powers,
Who, flatter'd by their leader's jocund show,
Stuff up his lust, as minutes fill up hours;
And as their captain, so their pride doth grow.
Paying more slavish tribute than they owe.
  By reprobate desire thus madly led,
  The Roman lord marcheth to Lucrece' bed.

The locks between her chamber and his will,
Each one by him enforc'd retires his ward;
But, as they open they all rate his ill,
Which drives the creeping thief to some regard,
The threshold grates the door to have him heard;
  Night-wand'ring weasels shriek to see him there;
  They fright him, yet he still pursues his fear.

As each unwilling portal yields him way,
Through little vents and crannies of the place
The wind wars with his torch, to make him stay,
And blows the smoke of it into his face,
Extinguishing his conduct in this case;
  But his hot heart, which fond desire doth scorch,
  Puffs forth another wind that fires the torch:

And being lighted, by the light he spies
Lucretia's glove, wherein her needle sticks;
He takes it from the rushes where it lies,
And griping it, the neeld his finger pricks:
As who should say this glove to wanton tricks
  Is not inur'd: return again in haste;
  Thou see'st our mistress' ornaments are chaste.

But all these poor forbiddings could not stay him;
He in the worst sense construes their denial:
The doors, the wind, the glove that did delay him,
He takes for accidental things of trial;
Or as those bars which stop the hourly dial,
  Who with a lingering stay his course doth let,
  Till every minute pays the hour his debt.

'So, so,' quoth he, 'these lets attend the time,
Like little frosts that sometime threat the spring.
To add a more rejoicing to the prime,
And give the sneaped birds more cause to sing.
Pain pays the income of each precious thing;
  Huge rocks, high winds, strong pirates, shelves and sands,
  The merchant fears, ere rich at home he lands.'

Now is he come unto the chamber door,
That shuts him from the heaven of his thought,
Which with a yielding latch, and with no more,
Hath barr'd him from the blessed thing he sought.
So from himself impiety hath wrought,
  That for his prey to pray he doth begin,
  As if the heavens should countenance his sin.

But in the midst of his unfruitful prayer,
Having solicited the eternal power,
That his foul thoughts might compass his fair fair,
And they would stand auspicious to the hour,
Even there he starts:quoth he, 'I must de-flower;
  The powers to whom I pray abhor this fact,
  How can they then assist me in the act?

'Then Love and Fortune be my gods, my guide!
My will is back'd with resolution:
Thoughts are but dreams till their effects be tried,
The blackest sin is clear'd with absolution;
Against love's fire fear's frost hath dissolution.
  The eye of heaven is out, and misty night
  Covers the shame that follows sweet delight.'

This said, his guilty hand pluck'd up the latch,
And with his knee the door he opens wide:
The dove sleeps fast that this night-owl will catch;
Thus treason works ere traitors be espied.
Who sees the lurking serpent steps aside;
  But she, sound sleeping, fearing no such thing,
  Lies at the mercy of his mortal sting.

Into the chamber wickedly he stalks,
And gazeth on her yet unstained bed.
The curtains being close, about he walks,
Rolling his greedy eyeballs in his head:
By their high treason is his heart misled;
  Which gives the watch-word to his hand full soon
  To draw the cloud that hides the silver moon.

Look, as the fair and fiery-pointed sun,
Rushing from forth a cloud, bereaves our sight;
Even so, the curtain drawn, his eyes begun
To wink, being blinded with a greater light:
Whether it is that she reflects so bright,
  That dazzleth them, or else some shame supposed;
  But blind they are, and keep themselves enclosed.

O, had they in that darksome prison died,
Then had they seen the period of their ill!
Then Collatine again by Lucrece' side
In his clear bed might have reposed still:
But they must ope, this blessed league to kill;
  And holy-thoughted Lucrece to their sight
  Must sell her joy, her life, her world's delight.

Her lily hand her rosy cheek lies under,
Cozening the pillow of a lawful kiss;
Who, therefore angry, seems to part in sunder,
Swelling on either side to want his bliss;
Between whose hills her head entombed is:
  Where, like a virtuous monument, she lies,
  To be admir'd of lewd unhallow'd eyes.

Without the bed her other fair hand was,
On the green coverlet; whose perfect white
Show'd like an April daisy on the grass,
With pearly sweat, resembling dew of night,
Her eyes, like marigolds, had sheath'd their light,
  And canopied in darkness sweetly lay,
  Till they might open to adorn the day.

Her hair, like golden threads, play'd with her breath;
O modest wantons! wanton modesty!
Showing life's triumph in the map of death,
And death's dim look in life's mortality:
Each in her sleep themselves so beautify,
  As if between them twain there were no strife,
  But that life liv'd in death, and death in life.

Her breasts, like ivory globes circled with blue,
A pair of maiden worlds unconquered,
Save of their lord no bearing yoke they knew,
And him by oath they truly honoured.
These worlds in Tarquin new ambition bred:
  Who, like a foul usurper, went about
  From this fair throne to heave the owner out.

What could he see but mightily he noted?
What did he note but strongly he desir'd?
What he beheld, on that he firmly doted,
And in his will his wilful eye he tir'd.
With more than admiration he admir'd
  Her azure veins, her alabaster skin,
  Her coral lips, her snow-white dimpled chin.

As the grim lion fawneth o'er his prey,
Sharp hunger by the conquest satisfied,
So o'er this sleeping soul doth Tarquin stay,
His rage of lust by grazing qualified;
Slack'd, not suppress'd; for standing by her side,
  His eye, which late this mutiny restrains,
  Unto a greater uproar tempts his veins:

And they, like straggling slaves for pillage fighting,
Obdurate vassals. fell exploits effecting,
In bloody death and ravishment delighting,
Nor children's tears nor mothers' groans respecting,
Swell in their pride, the onset still expecting:
  Anon his beating heart, alarum striking,
  Gives the hot charge and bids them do their liking.

His drumming heart cheers up his burning eye,
His eye commends the leading to his hand;
His hand, as proud of such a dignity,
Smoking with pride, march'd on to make his stand
On her bare breast, the heart of all her land;
  Whose ranks of blue veins, as his hand did scale,
  Left their round turrets destitute and pale.

They, mustering to the quiet cabinet
Where their dear governess and lady lies,
Do tell her she is dreadfully beset,
And fright her with confusion of their cries:
She, much amaz'd, breaks ope her lock'd-up eyes,
  Who, peeping forth this tumult to behold,
  Are by his flaming torch dimm'd and controll'd.

Imagine her as one in dead of night
From forth dull sleep by dreadful fancy waking,
That thinks she hath beheld some ghastly sprite,
Whose grim aspect sets every joint a shaking:
What terror 'tis! but she, in worser taking,
  From sleep disturbed, heedfully doth view
  The sight which makes supposed terror true.

Wrapp'd and confounded in a thousand fears,
Like to a new-kill'd bird she trembling lies;
She dares not look; yet, winking, there appears
Quick-shifting antics, ugly in her eyes:
Such shadows are the weak brain's forgeries:
  Who, angry that the eyes fly from their lights,
  In darkness daunts them with more dreadful sights.

His hand, that yet remains upon her breast,
(Rude ram, to batter such an ivory wall!)
May feel her heart, poor citizen, distress'd,
Wounding itself to death, rise up and fall,
Beating her bulk, that his hand shakes withal.
  This moves in him more rage, and lesser pity,
  To make the breach, and enter this sweet city.

First, like a trumpet, doth his tongue begin
To sound a parley to his heartless foe,
Who o'er the white sheet peers her whiter chin,
The reason of this rash alarm to know,
Which he by dumb demeanour seeks to show;
  But she with vehement prayers urgeth still
  Under what colour he commits this ill.

Thus he replies: 'The colour in thy face,
(That even for anger makes the lily pale,
And the red rose blush at her own disgrace)
Shall plead for me and tell my loving tale:
Under that colour am I come to scale
  Thy never-conquer'd fort: the fault is thine,
  For those thine eyes betray thee unto mine.

'Thus I forestall thee, if thou mean to chide:
Thy beauty hath ensnared thee to this night,
Where thou with patience must my will abide,
My will that marks thee for my earth's delight,
Which I to conquer sought with all my might;
  But as reproof and reason beat it dead,
  By thy bright beauty was it newly bred.

'I see what crosses my attempt will bring;
I know what thorns the growing rose defends;
I think the honey guarded with a sting;
All this, beforehand, counsel comprehends:
But will is deaf, and hears no heedful friends;
  Only he hath an eye to gaze on beauty,
  And dotes on what he looks, 'gainst law or duty.

'I have debated, even in my soul,
What wrong, what shame, what sorrow I shall breed;
But nothing can Affection's course control,
Or stop the headlong fury of his speed.
I know repentant tears ensue the deed,
  Reproach, disdain, and deadly enmity;
  Yet strike I to embrace mine infamy.'

This said, he shakes aloft his Roman blade,
Which, like a falcon towering in the skies,
Coucheth the fowl below with his wings' shade,
Whose crooked beak threats if he mount he dies:
So under his insulting falchion lies
  Harmless Lucretia, marking what he tells
  With trembling fear, as fowl hear falcon's bells.

'Lucrece,' quoth he, 'this night I must enjoy thee:
If thou deny, then force must work my way,
For in thy bed I purpose to destroy thee;
That done, some worthless slave of thine I'll slay.
To kill thine honour with thy life's decay;
  And in thy dead arms do I mean to place him,
  Swearing I slew him, seeing thee embrace him.

'So thy surviving husband shall remain
The scornful mark of every open eye;
Thy kinsmen hang their heads at this disdain,
Thy issue blurr'd with nameless bastardy:
And thou, the author of their obloquy,
  Shalt have thy trespass cited up in rhymes,
   And sung by children in succeeding times.

'But if thou yield, I rest thy secret friend:
The fault unknown is as a thought unacted;
A little harm, done to a great good end,
For lawful policy remains enacted.
The poisonous simple sometimes is compacted
  In a pure compound; being so applied,
  His venom in effect is purified.

'Then, for thy husband and thy children's sake,
Tender my suit: bequeath not to their lot
The shame that from them no device can take,
The blemish that will never be forgot;
Worse than a slavish wipe, or birth-hour's blot:
  For marks descried in men's nativity
  Are nature's faults, not their own infamy.'

Here with a cockatrice' dead-killing eye
He rouseth up himself and makes a pause;
While she, the picture of pure piety,
Like a white hind under the grype's sharp claws,
Pleads in a wilderness where are no laws,
  To the rough beast that knows no gentle right,
  Nor aught obeys but his foul appetite.

But when a black-fac'd cloud the world doth threat,
In his dim mist the aspiring mountains hiding,
From earth's dark womb some gentle gust doth get,
Which blows these pitchy vapours from their biding,
Hindering their present fall by this dividing;
  So his unhallow'd haste her words delays,
  And moody Pluto winks while Orpheus plays.

Yet, foul night-working cat, he doth but dally,
While in his hold-fast foot the weak mouse panteth;
Her sad behaviour feeds his vulture folly,
A swallowing gulf that even in plenty wanteth:
His ear her prayers admits, but his heart granteth
  No penetrable entrance to her plaining:
  Tears harden lust, though marble wear with raining.

Her pity-pleading eyes are sadly fix'd
In the remorseless wrinkles of his face;
Her modest eloquence with sighs is mix'd,
Which to her oratory adds more grace.
She puts the period often from his place,
  And midst the sentence so her accent breaks,
  That twice she doth begin ere once she speaks.

She conjures him by high almighty Jove,
By knighthood, gentry, and sweet friendship's oath,
By her untimely tears, her husband's love,
By holy human law, and common troth,
By heaven and earth, and all the power of both,
  That to his borrow'd bed he make retire,
  And stoop to honour, not to foul desire.

Quoth she, 'Reward not hospitality
With such black payment as thou hast pretended;
Mud not the fountain that gave drink to thee;
Mar not the thing that cannot be amended;
End thy ill aim before the shoot be ended:
  He is no woodman that doth bend his bow
  To strike a poor unseasonable doe.

'My husband is thy friend; for his sake spare me;
Thyself art mighty; for thine own sake leave me;
Myself a weakling, do not then ensnare me;
Thou look'st not like deceit; do not deceive me;
My sighs, like whirlwinds, labour hence to heave thee.
  If ever man were mov'd with woman's moans,
  Be moved with my tears, my sighs, my groans:

'All which together, like a troubled ocean,
Beat at thy rocky and wreck-threatening heart;
To soften it with their continual motion;
For stones dissolv'd to water do convert.
O, if no harder than a stone thou art,
  Melt at my tears, and be compassionate!
  Soft pity enters at an iron gate.

'In Tarquin's likeness I did entertain thee;
Hast thou put on his shape to do him shame?
To all the host of heaven I complain me,
Thou wrong'st his honour, wound'st his princely name.
Thou art not what thou seem'st; and if the same,
  Thou seem'st not what thou art, a god, a king;
  For kings like gods should govern every thing.

'How will thy shame be seeded in thine age,
When thus thy vices bud before thy spring!
If in thy hope thou dar'st do such outrage,
What dar'st thou not when once thou art a king!
O, be remember'd, no outrageous thing
  From vassal actors can he wip'd away;
  Then kings' misdeeds cannot be hid in clay.

'This deed will make thee only lov'd for fear,
But happy monarchs still are fear'd for love:
With foul offenders thou perforce must bear,
When they in thee the like offences prove:
If but for fear of this, thy will remove;
  For princes are the glass, the school, the book,
  Where subjects eyes do learn, do read, do look.

'And wilt thou be the school where Lust shall learn?
Must he in thee read lectures of such shame:
Wilt thou be glass, wherein it shall discern
Authority for sin, warrant for blame,
To privilege dishonour in thy name?
  Thou back'st reproach against long-living laud,
  And mak'st fair reputation but a bawd.

'Hast thou command? by him that gave it thee,
From a pure heart command thy rebel will:
Draw not thy sword to guard iniquity,
For it was lent thee all that brood to kill.
Thy princely office how canst thou fulfill,
  When, pattern'd by thy fault, foul Sin may say
  He learn'd to sin, and thou didst teach the way?

'Think but how vile a spectacle it were
To view thy present trespass in another.
Men's faults do seldom to themselves appear;
Their own transgressions partially they smother:
This guilt would seem death-worthy in thy brother.
  O how are they wrapp'd in with infamies
  That from their own misdeeds askaunce their eyes!

'To thee, to thee, my heav'd-up hands appeal,
Not to seducing lust, thy rash relier;
I sue for exil'd majesty's repeal;
Let him return, and flattering thoughts retire:
His true respect will 'prison false desire,
  And wipe the dim mist from thy doting eyne,
  That thou shalt see thy state, and pity mine.'

'Have done,' quoth he: 'my uncontrolled tide
Turns not, but swells the higher by this let.
Small lights are soon blown out, huge fires abide,
And with the wind in greater fury fret:
The petty streams that pay a daily debt
  To their salt sovereign, with their fresh falls' haste,
  Add to his flow, but alter not his taste.'

'Thou art,' quoth she, 'a sea, a sovereign king;
And, lo, there falls into thy boundless flood
Black lust, dishonour, shame, misgoverning,
Who seek to stain the ocean of thy blood.
If all these petty ills shall change thy good,
  Thy sea within a puddle's womb is hears'd,
  And not the puddle in thy sea dispers'd.

'So shall these slaves be king, and thou their slave;
Thou nobly base, they basely dignified;
Thou their fair life, and they thy fouler grave;
Thou loathed in their shame, they in thy pride:
The lesser thing should not the greater hide;
  The cedar stoops not to the base shrub's foot,
  But low shrubs whither at the cedar's root.

'So let thy thoughts, low vassals to thy state'
'No more,' quoth he; 'by heaven, I will not hear thee:
Yield to my love; if not, enforced hate,
Instead of love's coy touch, shall rudely tear thee;
That done, despitefully I mean to bear thee
  Unto the base bed of some rascal groom,
  To be thy partner in this shameful doom.'

This said, he sets his foot upon the light,
For light and lust are deadly enemies;
Shame folded up in blind concealing night,
When most unseen, then most doth tyrannize.
The wolf hath seiz'd his prey, the poor lamb cries;
  Till with her own white fleece her voice controll'd
  Entombs her outcry in her lips' sweet fold:

For with the nightly linen that she wears
He pens her piteous clamours in her head;
Cooling his hot face in the chastest tears
That ever modest eyes with sorrow shed.
O, that prone lust should stain so pure a bed!
  The spots whereof could weeping purify,
  Her tears should drop on them perpetually.

But she hath lost a dearer thing than life,
And he hath won what he would lose again.
This forced league doth force a further strife;
This momentary joy breeds months of pain,
This hot desire converts to cold disdain:
  Pure Chastity is rifled of her store,
  And Lust, the thief, far poorer than before.

Look, as the full-fed hound or gorged hawk,
Unapt for tender smell or speedy flight,
Make slow pursuit, or altogether balk
The prey wherein by nature they delight;
So surfeit-taking Tarquin fares this night:
  His taste delicious, in digestion souring,
  Devours his will, that liv'd by foul devouring.

O deeper sin than bottomless conceit
Can comprehend in still imagination!
Drunken desire must vomit his receipt,
Ere he can see his own abomination.
While lust is in his pride no exclamation
  Can curb his heat, or rein his rash desire,
  Till, like a jade, self-will himself doth tire.

And then with lank and lean discolour'd cheek,
With heavy eye, knit brow, and strengthless pace,
Feeble desire, all recreant, poor, and meek,
Like to a bankrupt beggar wails his case:
The flesh being proud, desire doth fight with Grace,
  For there it revels; and when that decays,
  The guilty rebel for remission prays.

So fares it with this faultful lord of Rome,
Who this accomplishment so hotly chas'd;
For now against himself he sounds this doom,
That through the length of times he stands disgrac'd:
Besides, his soul's fair temple is defac'd;
  To whose weak ruins muster troops of cares,
  To ask the spotted princess how she fares.

She says, her subjects with foul insurrection
Have batter'd down her consecrated wall,
And by their mortal fault brought in subjection
Her immortality, and made her thrall
To living death, and pain perpetual;
  Which in her prescience she controlled still,
  But her foresight could not forestall their will.

Even in this thought through the dark night he stealeth,
A captive victor that hath lost in gain;
Bearing away the wound that nothing healeth,
The scar that will, despite of cure, remain;
Leaving his spoil perplex'd in greater pain.
  She hears the load of lust he left behind,
  And he the burthen of a guilty mind.

He like a thievish dog creeps sadly thence;
She like a wearied lamb lies panting there;
He scowls, and hates himself for his offence;
She, desperate, with her nails her flesh doth tear;
He faintly flies, sweating with guilty fear;
  She stays, exclaiming on the direful night;
  He runs, and chides his vanish'd, loath'd delight.

He thence departs a heavy convertite;
She there remains a hopeless castaway:
He in his speed looks for the morning light;
She prays she never may behold the day;
'For day,' quoth she, 'night's scapes doth open lay;
  And my true eyes have never practis'd how
  To cloak offences with a cunning brow.

'They think not but that every eye can see
The same disgrace which they themselves behold;
And therefore would they still in darkness be,
To have their unseen sin remain untold;
For they their guilt with weeping will unfold,
  And grave, like water that doth eat in steel,
  Upon my cheeks what helpless shame I feel.'

Here she exclaims against repose and rest,
And bids her eyes hereafter still be blind.
She wakes her heart by beating on her breast,
And bids it leap from thence, where it may find
Some purer chest, to close so pure a mind.
  Frantic with grief thus breathes she forth her spite
  Against the unseen secrecy of night:

'O comfort-killing night, image of hell!
Dim register and notary of shame!
Black stage for tragedies and murders fell!
Vast sin-concealing chaos! nurse of blame!
Blind muffled bawd! dark harbour for defame!
  Grim cave of death, whispering conspirator
  With close-tongued treason and the ravisher!

'O hateful, vaporous, and foggy night!
Since thou art guilty of my cureless crime,
Muster thy mists to meet the eastern light,
Make war against proportion'd course of time!
Or if thou wilt permit the sun to climb
  His wonted height, yet ere he go to bed,
  Knit poisonous clouds about his golden head.

'With rotten damps ravish the morning air;
Let their exhal'd unwholesome breaths make sick
The life of purity, the supreme fair,
Ere he arrive his weary noontide prick;
And let thy misty vapours march so thick,
  That in their smoky ranks his smother'd light
  May set at noon and make perpetual night.

'Were Tarquin night (as he is but night's child),
The silver-shining queen he would distain;
Her twinkling handmaids too, by him defil'd,
Through  Night's  black  bosom  should not peep again:
So should I have co-partners in my pain:
  And fellowship in woe doth woe assuage,
  As palmers' chat makes short their pilgrimage.

'Where now I have no one to blush with me,
To cross their arms and hang their heads with mine,
To mask their brows, and hide their infamy;
But I alone alone must sit and pine,
Seasoning the earth with showers of silver brine,
  Mingling my talk with tears, my grief with groans,
  Poor wasting monuments of lasting moans.

'O night, thou furnace of foul-reeking smoke,
Let not the jealous day behold that face
Which underneath thy black all-hiding cloak
Immodesty lies martyr'd with disgrace!
Keep still possession of thy gloomy place,
  That all the faults which in thy reign are made,
  May likewise be sepulchred in thy shade!

'Make me not object to the tell-tale day!
The light will show, character'd in my brow,
The story of sweet chastity's decay,
The impious breach of holy wedlock vow:
Yea, the illiterate, that know not how
  To cipher what is writ in learned books,
  Will quote my loathsome trespass in my looks.

'The nurse, to still her child, will tell my story
And fright her crying babe with Tarquin's name;
The orator, to deck his oratory,
Will couple my reproach to Tarquin's shame:
Feast-finding minstrels, tuning my defame,
  Will tie the hearers to attend each line,
  How Tarquin wronged me, I Collatine.

'Let my good name, that senseless reputation,
For Collatine's dear love be kept unspotted:
If that be made a theme for disputation,
The branches of another root are rotted,
And undeserved reproach to him allotted,
  That is as clear from this attaint of mine
  As I, ere this, was pure to Collatine.

'O unseen shame! invisible disgrace!
O unfelt sore! crest-wounding, private scar!
Reproach is stamp'd in Collatinus' face,
And Tarquin's eye may read the mot afar,
How he in peace is wounded, not in war.
  Alas, how many bear such shameful blows,
  Which not themselves, but he that gives them knows!

'If, Collatine, thine honour lay in me,
From me by strong assault it is bereft.
My honey lost, and I, a drone-like bee,
Have no perfection of my summer left,
But robb'd and ransack'd by injurious theft:
  In thy weak hive a wandering wasp hath crept,
  And suck'd the honey which thy chaste bee kept.

'Yet am I guilty of thy honour's wrack;
Yet for thy honour did I entertain him;
Coming from thee, I could not put him back,
For it had been dishonour to disdain him:
Besides, of weariness he did complain him,
  And talk'd of virtue:O unlook'd-for evil,
  When virtue is profan'd in such a devil!

'Why should the worm intrude the maiden bud?
Or hateful cuckoos hatch in sparrows' nests?
Or toads infect fair founts with venom mud?
Or tyrant folly lurk in gentle breasts?
Or kings be breakers of their own behests?
  But no perfection is so absolute,
  That some impurity doth not pollute.

'The aged man that coffers up his gold
Is plagued with cramps, and gouts, and painful fits;
And scarce hath eyes his treasure to behold,
But like still-pining Tantalus he sits,
And useless barns the harvest of his wits;
  Having no other pleasure of his gain
  But torment that it cannot cure his pain.

'So then he hath it when he cannot use it,
And leaves it to be master'd by his young;
Who in their pride do presently abuse it:
Their father was too weak, and they too strong,
To hold their cursed-blessed fortune long.
  The sweets we wish for turn to loathed sours,
  Even in the moment that we call them ours.

'Unruly blasts wait on the tender spring;
Unwholesome weeds take root with precious flowers;
The adder hisses where the sweet birds sing;
What virtue breeds iniquity devours:
We have no good that we can say is ours,
  But ill-annexed Opportunity
  Or kills his life or else his quality.

'O Opportunity, thy guilt is great:
'Tis thou that executest the traitor's treason;
Thou set'st the wolf where he the lamb may get;
Whoever plots the sin, thou 'point'st the season;
'Tis thou that spurn'st at right, at law, at reason;
  And in thy shady cell, where none may spy him,
  Sits Sin, to seize the souls that wander by him.

'Thou mak'st the vestal violate her oath;
Thou blow'st the fire when temperance is thaw'd;
Thou smother'st honesty, thou murther'st troth;
Thou foul abettor! thou notorious bawd!
Thou plantest scandal and displacest laud:
  Thou ravisher, thou traitor, thou false thief,
  Thy honey turns to gall, thy joy to grief!

'Thy secret pleasure turns to open shame,
Thy private feasting to a public fast;
Thy smoothing titles to a ragged name,
Thy sugar'd tongue to bitter wormwood taste:
Thy violent vanities can never last.
  How comes it then, vile Opportunity,
  Being so bad, such numbers seek for thee?

'When wilt thou be the humble suppliant's friend,
And bring him where his suit may be obtain'd?
When wilt thou sort an hour great strifes to end?
Or free that soul which wretchedness hath chain'd?
Give physic to the sick, ease to the pain'd?
  The poor, lame, blind, halt, creep, cry out for thee;
  But they ne'er meet with Opportunity.

'The patient dies while the physician sleeps;
The orphan pines while the oppressor feeds;
Justice is feasting while the widow weeps;
Advice is sporting while infection breeds;
Thou grant'st no time for charitable deeds:
  Wrath, envy, treason, rape, and murder's rages,
  Thy heinous hours wait on them as their pages.

'When truth and virtue have to do with thee,
A thousand crosses keep them from thy aid;
They buy thy help; but Sin ne'er gives a fee,
He gratis comes; and thou art well appay'd
As well to hear as grant what he hath said.
  My Collatine would else have come to me
  When Tarquin did, but he was stay'd by thee.

'Guilty thou art of murder and of theft;
Guilty of perjury and subornation;
Guilty of treason, forgery, and shift;
Guilty of incest, that abomination:
An accessory by thine inclination
  To all sins past, and all that are to come,
  From the creation to the general doom.

'Mis-shapen Time, copesmate of ugly night,
Swift subtle post, carrier of grisly care,
Eater of youth, false slave to false delight,
Base watch of woes, sin's pack-horse, virtue's snare;
Thou nursest all and murtherest all that are:
  O hear me then, injurious, shifting Time!
  Be guilty of my death, since of my crime.

'Why hath thy servant, Opportunity,
Betray'd the hours thou gav'st me to repose?
Cancell'd my fortunes, and enchained me
To endless date of never-ending woes?
Time's office is to fine the hate of foes;
  To eat up errors by opinion bred,
  Not spend the dowry of a lawful bed.

'Time's glory is to calm contending kings,
To unmask falsehood, and bring truth to light,
To stamp the seal of time in aged things,
To wake the morn, and sentinel the night,
To wrong the wronger till he render right;
  To ruinate proud buildings with thy hours,
  And smear with dust their glittering golden towers:

'To fill with worm-holes stately monuments,
To feed oblivion with decay of things,
To blot old books and alter their contents,
To pluck the quills from ancient ravens' wings,
To dry the old oak's sap and cherish springs;
  To spoil antiquities of hammer'd steel,
  And turn the giddy round of Fortune's wheel;

'To show the beldame daughters of her daughter,
To make the child a man, the man a child,
To slay the tiger that doth live by slaughter,
To tame the unicorn and lion wild,
To mock the subtle, in themselves beguil'd;
  To cheer the ploughman with increaseful crops,
  And waste huge stones with little water-drops.

'Why work'st thou mischief in thy pilgrimage,
Unless thou couldst return to make amends?
One poor retiring minute in an age
Would purchase thee a thousand thousand friends,
Lending him wit that to bad debtors lends:
  O, this dread night, wouldst thou one hour come back,
  I could prevent this storm, and shun thy wrack!

'Thou cease!ess lackey to eternity,
With some mischance cross Tarquin in his flight:
Devise extremes beyond extremity,
To make him curse this cursed crimeful night:
Let ghastly shadows his lewd eyes affright;
  And the dire thought of his committed evil
  Shape every bush a hideous shapeless devil.

'Disturb his hours of rest with restless trances,
Afflict him in his bed with bedrid groans;
Let there bechance him pitiful mischances,
To make him moan; but pity not his moans:
Stone him with harden'd hearts, harder than stones;
  And let mild women to him lose their mildness,
  Wilder to him than tigers in their wildness.

'Let him have time to tear his curled hair,
Let him have time against himself to rave,
Let him have time of Time's help to despair,
Let him have time to live a loathed slave,
Let him have time a beggar's orts to crave;
  And time to see one that by alms doth live
  Disdain to him disdained scraps to give.

'Let him have time to see his friends his foes,
And merry fools to mock at him resort;
Let him have time to mark how slow time goes
In time of sorrow, and how swift and short
His time of folly and his time of sport:
  And ever let his unrecalling crime
  Have time to wail the abusing of his time.

'O Time, thou tutor both to good and bad,
Teach me to curse him that thou taught'st this ill!
At his own shadow let the thief run mad!
Himself himself seek every hour to kill!
Such wretched hands such wretched blood should spill:
  For who so base would such an office have
  As slanderous deathsman to so base a slave?

The baser is he, coming from a king,
To shame his hope with deeds degenerate.
The mightier man, the mightier is the thing
That makes him honour'd, or begets him hate;
For greatest scandal waits on greatest state.
  The moon being clouded presently is miss'd,
  But little stars may hide them when they list.

'The crow may bathe his coal-black wings in mire,
And unperceived fly with the filth away;
But if the like the snow-white swan desire,
The stain upon his silver down will stay.
Poor grooms are sightless night, kings glorious day:
  Gnats are unnoted wheresoe'er they fly,
  But eagles gazed upon with every eye.

'Out, idle words, servants to shallow fools!
Unprofitable sounds, weak arbitrators!
Busy yourselves in skill-contending schools;
Debate where leisure serves with dull debaters;
To trembling clients be you mediators:
  For me, I force not argument a straw,
  Since that my case is past the help of law.

'In vain I rail at Opportunity,
At Time, at Tarquin, and uncheerful night;
In vain I cavil with mine infamy,
In vain I spurn at my confirm'd despite:
This helpless smoke of words doth me no right.
  The remedy indeed to do me good
  Is to let forth my foul-defil'd blood.

'Poor hand, why quiver'st thou at this decree?
Honour thyself to rid me of this shame;
For if I die, my honour lives in thee;
But if I live, thou livest in my defame:
Since thou couldst not defend thy loyal dame,
  And wast afear'd to scratch her wicked foe,
  Kill both thyself and her for yielding so.'

This said, from her be-tumbled couch she starteth,
To find some desperate instrument of death:
But this no slaughter-house no tool imparteth,
To make more vent for passage of her breath;
Which, thronging through her lips, so vanisheth
  As smoke from Aetna, that in air consumes,
  Or that which from discharged cannon fumes.

'In vain,' quoth she, 'I live, and seek in vain
Some happy mean to end a hapless life.
I fear'd by Tarquin's falchion to be slain,
Yet for the self-same purpose seek a knife:
But when I fear'd I was a loyal wife:
  So am I now:O no, that cannot be;
  Of that true type hath Tarquin rifled me.

'O! that is gone for which I sought to live,
And therefore now I need not fear to die.
To clear this spot by death, at least I give
A badge of fame to slander's livery;
A dying life to living infamy;
  Poor helpless help, the treasure stolen away,
  To burn the guiltless casket where it lay!

'Well, well, dear Collatine, thou shalt not know
The stained taste of violated troth;
I will not wrong thy true affection so,
To flatter thee with an infringed oath;
This bastard graff shall never come to growth:
  He shall not boast who did thy stock pollute
  That thou art doting father of his fruit.

Nor shall he smile at thee in secret thought,
Nor laugh with his companions at thy state;
But thou shalt know thy interest was not bought
Basely with gold, but stolen from forth thy gate.
For me, I am the mistress of my fate,
  And with my trespass never will dispense,
  Till life to death acquit my forced offence.

'I will not poison thee with my attaint,
Nor fold my fault in cleanly-coin'd excuses;
My sable ground of sin I will not paint,
To hide the truth of this false night's abuses;
My tongue shall utter all; mine eyes, like sluices,
  As from a mountain-spring that feeds a dale,
  Shall gush pure streams to purge my impure tale.'

By this; lamenting Philomel had ended
The well-tun'd warble of her nightly sorrow,
And solemn night with slow-sad gait descended
To ugly hell; when, lo, the blushing morrow
Lends light to all fair eyes that light will borrow:
  But cloudy Lucrece shames herself to see,
  And therefore still in night would cloister'd be.

Revealing day through every cranny spies,
And seems to point her out where she sits weeping,
To whom she sobbing speaks: 'O eye of eyes,
Why pryest thou through my window? leave thy peeping;
Mock with thy tickling beams eyes that are sleeping:
  Brand not my forehead with thy piercing light,
  For day hath nought to do what's done by night.'

Thus cavils she with every thing she sees:
True grief is fond and testy as a child,
Who wayward once, his mood with nought agrees.
Old woes, not infant sorrows, bear them mild;
Continuance tames the one: the other wild,
  Like an unpractis'd swimmer plunging still
  With too much labour drowns for want of skill.

So she, deep-drenched in a sea of care,
Holds disputation with each thing she views,
And to herself all sorrow doth compare;
No object but her passion's strength renews;
And as one shifts, another straight ensues:
  Sometime her grief is dumb and hath no words;
  Sometime 'tis mad, and too much talk affords.

The little birds that tune their morning's joy
Make her moans mad with their sweet melody.
For mirth doth search the bottom of annoy;
Sad souls are slain in merry company:
Grief best is pleas'd with grief's society:
  True sorrow then is feelingly suffic'd
  When with like semblance it is sympathiz'd.

'Tis double death to drown in ken of shore;
He ten times pines that pines beholding food;
To see the salve doth make the wound ache more;
Great grief grieves most at that would do it good;
Deep woes roll forward like a gentle flood;
  Who, being stopp'd, the bounding banks o'erflows;
  Grief dallied with nor law nor limit knows.

'You mocking birds,' quoth she, 'your tunes entomb
Within your hollow-swelling feather'd breasts,
And in my hearing be you mute and dumb!
(My restless discord loves no stops nor rests;
A woeful hostess brooks not merry guests:)
  Relish your nimble notes to pleasing ears;
  Distress likes dumps when time is kept with tears.

'Come, Philomel, that sing'st of ravishment,
Make thy sad grove in my dishevell'd hair:
As the dank earth weeps at thy languishment,
So I at each sad strain will strain a tear,
And with deep groans the diapason bear:
  For burthen-wise I'll hum on Tarquin still,
  While thou on Tereus descant'st better skill.

'And whiles against a thorn thou bear'st thy part,
To keep thy sharp woes waking, wretched I,
To imitate thee well, against my heart
Will fix a sharp knife, to affright mine eye;
Who, if it wink, shall thereon fall and die.
  These means, as frets upon an instrument,
  Shall tune our heart-strings to true languishment.

'And for, poor bird, thou sing'st not in the day,
As shaming any eye should thee behold,
Some dark deep desert, seated from the way,
That knows not parching heat nor freezing cold,
Will we find out; and there we will unfold
  To creatures stern sad tunes, to change their kinds:
  Since men prove beasts, let beasts bear gentle minds.'

As the poor frighted deer, that stands at gaze,
Wildly determining which way to fly,
Or one encompass'd with a winding maze,
That cannot tread the way out readily;
So with herself is she in mutiny,
  To live or die which of the twain were better,
  When life is sham'd, and Death reproach's debtor.

'To kill myself,' quoth she, 'alack! what were it,
But with my body my poor soul's pollution?
They that lose half with greater patience bear it
Than they whose whole is swallow'd in confusion.
That mother tries a merciless conclusion
  Who, having two sweet babes, when death takes one,
  Will slay the other, and be nurse to none.

'My body or my soul, which was the dearer,
When the one pure, the other made divine?
Whose love of either to myself was nearer?
When both were kept for heaven and Collatine?
Ah, me! the bark peel'd from the lofty pine,
  His leaves will wither, and his sap decay;
  So must my soul, her bark being peel'd away.

'Her house is sack'd, her quiet interrupted,
Her mansion batter'd by the enemy;
Her sacred temple spotted, spoil'd, corrupted,
Grossly engirt with daring infamy:
Then let it not be call'd impiety,
  If in this blemish'd fort I make some hole
  Through which I may convey this troubled soul.

'Yet die I will not till my Collatine
Have heard the cause of my untimely death;
That he may vow, in that sad hour of mine,
Revenge on him that made me stop my breath.
My stained blood to Tarquin I'll bequeath,
  Which by him tainted shall for him be spent,
  And as his due writ in my testament.

'My honour I'll bequeath unto the knife
That wounds my body so dishonoured.
'Tis honour to deprive dishonour'd life;
The one will live, the other being dead:
So of shame's ashes shall my fame be bred;
  For in my death I murther shameful scorn:
  My shame so dead, mine honour is new-born.

'Dear lord of that dear jewel I have lost,
What legacy shall I bequeath to thee?
My resolution, Love, shall be thy boast,
By whose example thou reveng'd mayst be.
How Tarquin must be used, read it in me:
  Myself, thy friend, will kill myself, thy foe,
  And, for my sake, serve thou false Tarquin so.

'This brief abridgement of my will I make:
My soul and body to the skies and ground;
My resolution, husband, do thou take;
Mine honour be the knife's that makes my wound;
My shame be his that did my fame confound;
  And all my fame that lives disburs'd be
  To those that live, and think no shame of me.

'Thou, Collatine, shalt oversee this will;
How was I overseen that thou shalt see it!
My blood shall wash the slander of mine ill;
My life's foul deed my life's fair end shall free it.
Faint not, faint heart, but stoutly say "so be it:"
  Yield to my hand; my hand shall conquer thee;
  Thou dead, both die, and both shall victors be.'

This plot of death when sadly she had laid,
And wip'd the brinish pearl from her bright eyes,
With untun'd tongue she hoarsely call'd her maid,
Whose swift obedience to her mistress hies;
For fleet-wing'd duty with thought's feathers flies.
  Poor Lucrece' cheeks unto her maid seem so
  As winter meads when sun doth melt their snow.

Her mistress she doth give demure good-morrow,
With soft-slow tongue, true mark of modesty,
And sorts a sad look to her lady's sorrow,
(For why her face wore sorrow's livery,)
But durst not ask of her audaciously
  Why her two suns were cloud-eclipsed so,
  Nor why her fair cheeks over-wash'd with woe.

But as the earth doth weep, the sun being set,
Each flower moisten'd like a melting eye;
Even so the maid with swelling drops 'gan wet
Her circled eyne, enforc'd by sympathy
Of those fair suns, set in her mistress' sky,
  Who in a salt-wav'd ocean quench their light,
  Which makes the maid weep like the dewy night.

A pretty while these pretty creatures stand,
Like ivory conduits coral cisterns filling:
One justly weeps; the other takes in hand
No cause, but company, of her drops spilling:
Their gentle sex to weep are often willing:
  Grieving themselves to guess at others' smarts,
  And then they drown their eyes or break their hearts.

For men have marble, women waxen minds,
And therefore are they form'd as marble will;
The weak oppress'd, the impression of strange kinds
Is form'd in them by force, by fraud, or skill:
Then call them not the authors of their ill,
  No more than wax shall be accounted evil,
  Wherein is stamp'd the semblance of a devil.

Their smoothness, like a goodly champaign plain,
Lays open all the little worms that creep;
In men, as in a rough-grown grove, remain
Cave-keeping evils that obscurely sleep:
Through crystal walls each little mote will peep:
  Though men can cover crimes with bold stern looks,
  Poor women's faces are their own faults' books.

No man inveigb against the wither'd flower,
But chide rough winter that the flower hath kill'd!
Not that devour'd, but that which doth devour,
Is worthy blame.  O, let it not be hild
Poor women's faults, that they are so fulfill'd
  With men's abuses! those proud lords, to blame,
  Make weak-made women tenants to their shame.

The precedent whereof in Lucrece view,
Assail'd by night with circumstances strong
Of present death, and shame that might ensue
By that her death, to do her husband wrong:
Such danger to resistance did belong;
  The dying fear through all her body spread;
  And who cannot abuse a body dead?

By this, mild Patience bid fair Lucrece speak
To the poor counterfeit of her complaining:
'My girl,' quoth she, 'on what occasion break
Those tears from thee, that down thy cheeks are raining?
If thou dost weep for grief of my sustaining,
  Know, gentle wench, it small avails my mood:
  If tears could help, mine own would do me good.

'But tell me, girl, when went'(and there she stay'd
Till after a deep groan) 'Tarquin from, hence?'
'Madam, ere I was up,' replied the maid,
'The more to blame my sluggard negligence:
Yet with the fault I thus far can dispense;
  Myself was stirring ere the break of day,
  And, ere I rose, was Tarquin gone away.

'But, lady, if your maid may be so bold,
She would request to know your heaviness.'
'O peace!' quoth Lucrece: 'if it should be told,
The repetition cannot make it less;
For more it is than I can well express:
  And that deep torture may be call'd a hell,
  When more is felt than one hath power to tell.

'Go, get me hither paper, ink, and pen
Yet save that labour, for I have them here.
What should I say?One of my husband's men
Bid thou be ready, by and by, to bear
A letter to my lord, my love, my dear;
  Bid him with speed prepare to carry it;
  The cause craves haste, and it will soon be writ.'

Her maid is gone, and she prepares to write,
First hovering o'er the paper with her quill:
Conceit and grief an eager combat fight;
What wit sets down is blotted straight with will;
This is too curious-good, this blunt and ill:
  Much like a press of people at a door,
  Throng her inventions, which shall go before.

At last she thus begins:'Thou worthy lord
Of that unworthy wife that greeteth thee,
Health to thy person! next vouchsafe to afford
(If ever, love, thy Lucrece thou wilt see)
Some present speed to come and visit me:
  So, I commend me from our house in grief:
  My woes are tedious, though my words are brief.'

Here folds she up the tenor of her woe,
Her certain sorrow writ uncertainly.
By this short schedule Collatine may know
Her grief, but not her grief's true quality;
She dares not thereof make discovery,
  Lest he should hold it her own gross abuse,
  Ere she with blood had stain'd her stain'd excuse.

Besides, the life and feeling of her passion
She hoards, to spend when he is by to hear her;
When sighs, and groans, and tears may grace the fashion
Of her disgrace, the better so to clear her
From that suspicion which the world my might bear her.
  To shun this blot, she would not blot the letter
  With words, till action might become them better.

To see sad sights moves more than hear them told;
For then the eye interprets to the ear
The heavy motion that it doth behold,
When every part a part of woe doth bear.
'Tis but a part of sorrow that we hear:
  Deep sounds make lesser noise than shallow fords,
  And sorrow ebbs, being blown with wind of words.

Her letter now is seal'd, and on it writ
'At Ardea to my lord with more than haste;'
The post attends, and she delivers it,
Charging the sour-fac'd groom to hie as fast
As lagging fowls before the northern blast.
  Speed more than speed but dull and slow she deems:
  Extremely still urgeth such extremes.

The homely villain court'sies to her low;
And, blushing on her, with a steadfast eye
Receives the scroll, without or yea or no,
And forth with bashful innocence doth hie.
But they whose guilt within their bosoms lie
  Imagine every eye beholds their blame;
  For Lucrece thought he blush'd to see her shame:

When, silly groom! God wot, it was defect
Of spirit, life, and bold audacity.
Such harmless creatures have a true respect
To talk in deeds, while others saucily
Promise more speed, but do it leisurely:
  Even so this pattern of the worn-out age
  Pawn'd honest looks, but laid no words to gage.

His kindled duty kindled her mistrust,
That two red fires in both their faces blaz'd;
She thought he blush'd, as knowing Tarquin's lust,
And, blushing with him, wistly on him gaz'd;
Her earnest eye did make him more amaz'd:
  The more saw the blood his cheeks replenish,
  The more she thought he spied in her some blemish.

But long she thinks till he return again,
And yet the duteous vassal scarce is gone.
The weary time she cannot entertain,
For now 'tis stale to sigh, to weep, to groan:
So woe hath wearied woe, moan tired moan,
  That she her plaints a little while doth stay,
  Pausing for means to mourn some newer way.

At last she calls to mind where hangs a piece
Of skilful painting, made for Priam's Troy;
Before the which is drawn the power of Greece,
For Helen's rape the city to destroy,
Threat'ning cloud-kissing Ilion with annoy;
  Which the conceited painter drew so proud,
  As heaven (it seem'd) to kiss the turrets bow'd.

A thousand lamentable objects there,
In scorn of Nature, Art gave lifeless life:
Many a dry drop seem'd a weeping tear,
Shed for the slaughter'd husband by the wife:
The red blood reek'd, to show the painter's strife;
  The dying eyes gleam'd forth their ashy lights,
  Like dying coals burnt out in tedious nights.

There might you see the labouring pioner
Begrim'd with sweat, and smeared all with dust;
And from the towers of Troy there would appear
The very eyes of men through loopholes thrust,
Gazing upon the Greeks with little lust:
  Such sweet observance in this work was had,
  That one might see those far-off eyes look sad.

In great commanders grace and majesty
You might behold, triumphing in their faces;
In youth, quick bearing and dexterity;
And here and there the painter interlaces
Pale cowards, marching on with trembling paces;
  Which heartless peasants did so well resemble,
  That one would swear he saw them quake and tremble.

In Ajax and Ulysses, O, what art
Of physiognomy might one behold!
The face of either 'cipher'd either's heart;
Their face their manners most expressly told:
In Ajax' eyes blunt rage and rigour roll'd;
  But the mild glance that sly Ulysses lent
  Show'd deep regard and smiling government.

There pleading might you see grave Nestor stand,
As't were encouraging the Greeks to fight;
Making such sober action with his hand
That it beguiled attention, charm'd the sight:
In speech, it seem'd, his beard, all silver white,
  Wagg'd up and down, and from his lips did fly
  Thin winding breath, which purl'd up to the sky.

About him were a press of gaping faces,
Which seem'd to swallow up his sound advice;
All jointly listening, but with several graces,
As if some mermaid did their ears entice;
Some high, some low, the painter was so nice:
  The scalps of many, almost hid behind,
  To jump up higher seem'd to mock the mind.

Here one man's hand lean'd on another's head,
His nose being shadow'd by his neighbour's ear;
Here one being throng'd bears back, all boll'n and red;
Another smother'd seems to pelt and swear;
And in their rage such signs of rage they bear,
  As, but for loss of Nestor's golden words,
  It seem'd they would debate with angry swords.

For much imaginary work was there;
Conceit deceitful, so compact, so kind,
That for Achilles' image stood his spear,
Grip'd in an armed hand; himself, behind,
Was left unseen, save to the eye of mind:
  A hand, a foot, a face, a leg, a head,
  Stood for the whole to be imagined,

And from the walls of strong-besieged Troy
When their brave hope, bold Hector, march'd to field,
Stood many Trojan mothers, sharing joy
To see their youthful sons bright weapons wield;
And to their hope they such odd action yield,
  That through their light joy seemed to appear,
  (Like bright things stain'd) a kind of heavy fear,

And, from the strond of Dardan, where they fought,
To Simois' reedy banks, the red blood ran,
Whose waves to imitate the battle sought
With swelling ridges; and their ranks began
To break upon the galled shore, and than
  Retire again, till, meeting greater ranks,
  They join, and shoot their foam at Simois' banks.

To this well-painted piece is Lucrece come,
To find a face where all distress is stell'd.
Many she sees where cares have carved some,
But none where all distress and dolour dwell'd,
Till she despairing Hecuba beheld,
  Staring on Priam's wounds with her old eyes,
  Which bleeding under Pyrrhus' proud foot lies.

In her the painter had anatomiz'd
Time's ruin, beauty's wrack, and grim care's reign:
Her cheeks with chops and wrinkles were disguis'd;
Of what she was no semblance did remain:
Her blue blood, chang'd to black in every vein,
  Wanting the spring that those shrunk pipes had fed,
  Show'd life imprison'd in a body dead.

On this sad shadow Lucrece spends her eyes,
And shapes her sorrow to the beldame's woes,
Who nothing wants to answer her but cries,
And bitter words to ban her cruel foes:
The painter was no god to lend her those;
  And therefore Lucrece swears he did her wrong,
  To give her so much grief, and not a tongue.

'Poor instrument,' quoth she, 'without a sound,
I'll tune thy woes with my lamenting tongue;
And drop sweet balm in Priam's painted wound,
And rail on Pyrrhus that hath done him wrong,
And with my tears quench Troy that burns so long;
  And with my knife scratch out the angry eyes
  Of all the Greeks that are thine enemies.

'Show me the strumpet that began this stir,
That with my nails her beauty I may tear.
Thy heat of lust, fond Paris, did incur
This load of wrath that burning Troy doth bear;
Thy eye kindled the fire that burneth here:
  And here in Troy, for trespass of thine eye,
  The sire, the son, the dame, and daughter die.

'Why should the private pleasure of some one
Become the public plague of many mo?
Let sin, alone committed, light alone
Upon his head that hath transgressed so.
Let guiltless souls be freed from guilty woe:
  For one's offence why should so many fall,
  To plague a private sin in general?

'Lo, here weeps Hecuba, here Priam dies,
Here manly Hector faints, here Troilus swounds;
Here friend by friend in bloody channel lies,
And friend to friend gives unadvised wounds,
And one man's lust these many lives confounds:
  Had doting Priam check'd his son's desire,
  Troy had been bright with fame and not with fire.'

Here feelingly she weeps Troy's painted woes:
For sorrow, like a heavy-hanging bell,
Once set on ringing, with his own weight goes;
Then little strength rings out the doleful knell:
So Lucrece set a-work sad tales doth tell
  To pencill'd pensiveness and colour'd sorrow;
  She lends them words, and she their looks doth borrow.

She throws her eyes about the painting round,
And whom she finds forlorn she doth lament:
At last she sees a wretched image bound,
That piteous looks to Phrygian shepherds lent:
His face, though full of cares, yet show'd content;
  Onward to Troy with the blunt swains he goes,
  So mild, that Patience seem'd to scorn his woes.

In him the painter labour'd with his skill
To hide deceit, and give the harmless show
An humble gait, calm looks, eyes wailing still,
A brow unbent, that seem'd to welcome woe;
Cheeks neither red nor pale, but mingled so
  That blushing red no guilty instance gave,
  Nor ashy pale the fear that false hearts have.

But, like a constant and confirmed devil,
He entertain'd a show so seeming just,
And therein so ensconc'd his secret evil,
That jealousy itself cold not mistrust
False-creeping craft and perjury should thrust
  Into so bright a day such black-fac'd storms,
  Or blot with hell-born sin such saint-like forms.

The well-skill'd workman this mild image drew
For perjur'd Sinon, whose enchanting story
The credulous Old Priam after slew;
Whose words, like wildfire, burnt the shining glory
Of rich-built Ilion, that the skies were sorry,
  And little stars shot from their fixed places,
  When their glass fell wherein they view'd their faces.

This picture she advisedly perus'd,
And chid the painter for his wondrous skill;
Saying, some shape in Sinon's was abus'd;
So fair a form lodged not a mind so ill:
And still on him she gaz'd; and gazing still,
  Such signs of truth in his plain face she spied,
  That she concludes the picture was belied.

'It cannot be,' quoth she, 'that so much guile'
(She would have said) 'can lurk in such a look;'
But Tarquin's shape came in her mind the while,
And from her tongue 'can lurk' from 'cannot' took;
'It cannot be' she in that sense forsook,
  And turn'd it thus: 'It cannot be, I find,
  But such a face should bear a wicked mind:

'For even as subtle Sinon here is painted,
So sober-sad, so weary, and so mild,
(As if with grief or travail he had fainted,)
To me came Tarquin armed; so beguil'd
With outward honesty, but yet defil'd
  With inward vice: as Priam him did cherish,
  So did I Tarquin; so my Troy did perish.

'Look, look, how listening Priam wets his eyes,
To see those borrow'd tears that Sinon sheds.
Priam, why art thou old and yet not wise?
For every tear he falls a Trojan bleeds;
His eye drops fire, no water thence proceeds;
  Those round clear pearls of his that move thy pity,
  Are balls of quenchless fire to burn thy city.

'Such devils steal effects from lightless hell;
For Sinon in his fire doth quake with cold,
And in that cold hot-burning fire doth dwell;
These contraries such unity do hold,
Only to flatter fools, and make them bold;
  So Priam's trust false Sinon's tears doth flatter,
  That he finds means to burn his Troy with water.'

Here, all enrag'd, such passion her assails,
That patience is quite beaten from her breast.
She tears the senseless Sinon with her nails,
Comparing him to that unhappy guest
Whose deed hath made herself herself detest;
  At last she smilingly with this gives o'er;
  'Fool, fool!' quoth she, 'his wounds will not be sore.'

Thus ebbs and flows the current of her sorrow,
And time doth weary time with her complaining.
She looks for night, and then she longs for morrow,
And both she thinks too long with her remaining:
Short time seems long in sorrow's sharp sustaining.
  Though woe be heavy, yet it seldom sleeps;
  And they that watch see time how slow it creeps.

Which all this time hath overslipp'd her thought,
That she with painted images hath spent;
Being from the feeling of her own grief brought
By deep surmise of others' detriment:
Losing her woes in shows of discontent.
  It easeth some, though none it ever cur'd,
  To think their dolour others have endur'd.

But now the mindful messenger, come back,
Brings home his lord and other company;
Who finds his Lucrece clad in mourning black:
And round about her tear-distained eye
Blue circles stream'd, like rainbows in the sky.
  These water-galls in her dim element
  Foretell new storms to those already spent.

Which when her sad-beholding husband saw,
Amazedly in her sad face he stares:
Her eyes, though sod in tears, look'd red and raw,
Her lively colour kill'd with deadly cares.
He hath no power to ask her how she fares,
  Both stood, like old acquaintance in a trance,
  Met far from home, wondering each other's chance.

At last he takes her by the bloodless hand,
And thus begins: 'What uncouth ill event
Hath thee befall'n, that thou dost trembling stand?
Sweet love, what spite hath thy fair colour spent?
Why art thou thus attir'd in discontent?
  Unmask, dear dear, this moody heaviness,
  And tell thy grief, that we may give redress.'

Three times with sighs she gives her sorrow fire,
Ere once she can discharge one word of woe:
At length address'd to answer his desire,
She modestly prepares to let them know
Her honour is ta'en prisoner by the foe;
  While Collatine and his consorted lords
  With sad attention long to hear her words.

And now this pale swan in her watery nest
Begins the sad dirge of her certain ending:
'Few words,' quoth she, 'shall fit the trespass best,
Where no excuse can give the fault amending:
In me more woes than words are now depending;
  And my laments would be drawn out too long,
  To tell them all with one poor tired tongue.

'Then be this all the task it hath to say:
Dear husband, in the interest of thy bed
A stranger came, and on that pillow lay
Where thou wast wont to rest thy weary head;
And what wrong else may be imagined
  By foul enforcement might be done to me,
  From that, alas! thy Lucrece is not free.

'For in the dreadful dead of dark midnight,
With shining falchion in my chamber came
A creeping creature, with a flaming light,
And softly cried Awake, thou Roman dame,
And entertain my love; else lasting shame
  On thee and thine this night I will inflict,
  If thou my love's desire do contradict.

'For some hard-favour'd groom of thine, quoth he,
Unless thou yoke thy liking to my will,
I'll murder straight, and then I'll slaughter thee
And swear I found you where you did fulfil
The loathsome act of lust, and so did kill
  The lechers in their deed: this act will be
  My fame and thy perpetual infamy.

'With this, I did begin to start and cry,
And then against my heart he sets his sword,
Swearing, unless I took all patiently,
I should not live to speak another word;
So should my shame still rest upon record,
  And never be forgot in mighty Rome
  The adulterate death of Lucrece and her groom.

'Mine enemy was strong, my poor self weak,
And far the weaker with so strong a fear:
My bloody judge forbade my tongue to speak;
No rightful plea might plead for justice there:
His scarlet lust came evidence to swear
  That my poor beauty had purloin'd his eyes;
  And when the judge is robb'd the prisoner dies.

'O, teach me how to make mine own excuse!
Or at the least this refuge let me find;
Though my gross blood be stain'd with this abuse,
Immaculate and spotless is my mind;
That was not forc'd; that never was inclin'd
  To accessary yieldings, but still pure
  Doth in her poison'd closet yet endure.'

Lo, here, the hopeless merchant of this loss,
With head declin'd, and voice damm'd up with woe,
With sad set eyes, and wretched arms across,
From lips new-waxen pale begins to blow
The grief away that stops his answer so:
  But wretched as he is he strives in vain;
  What he breathes out his breath drinks up again.

As through an arch the violent roaring tide
Outruns the eye that doth behold his haste;
Yet in the eddy boundeth in his pride
Back to the strait that forc'd him on so fast;
In rage sent out, recall'd in rage, being past:
  Even so his sighs, his sorrows make a saw.
  To push grief on, and back the same grief draw.

Which speechless woe of his poor she attendeth,
And his untimely frenzy thus awaketh:
'Dear Lord, thy sorrow to my sorrow lendeth
Another power; no flood by raining slaketh.
My woe too sensible thy passion maketh
  More feeling-painful: let it then suffice
  To drown one woe, one pair of weeping eyes.

'And for my sake, when I might charm thee so,
For she that was thy Lucrece,now attend me;
Be suddenly revenged on my foe,
Thine, mine, his own: suppose thou dost defend me
From what is past: the help that thou shalt lend me
  Comes all too late, yet let the traitor die;
  For sparing justice feeds iniquity.

'But ere I name him, you fair lords,' quoth she,
(Speaking to those that came with Collatine)
'Shall plight your honourable faiths to me,
With swift pursuit to venge this wrong of mine;
For 'tis a meritorious fair design
  To chase injustice with revengeful arms:
  Knights, by their oaths, should right poor ladies' harms.'

At this request, with noble disposition
Each present lord began to promise aid,
As bound in knighthood to her imposition,
Longing to hear the hateful foe bewray'd.
But she, that yet her sad task hath not said,
  The protestation stops. 'O, speak,' quoth she,
 'How may this forced stain be wip'd from me?

'What is the quality of mine offence,
Being constrain'd with dreadful circumstance?
May my pure mind with the foul act dispense,
My low-declined honour to advance?
May any terms acquit me from this chance?
  The poison'd fountain clears itself again;
  And why not I from this compelled stain?

With this, they all at once began to say,
Her body's stain her mind untainted clears;
While with a joyless smile she turns away
The face, that map which deep impression bears
Of hard misfortune, carv'd in it with tears.
  'No, no,' quoth she, 'no dame, hereafter living,
  By my excuse shall claim excuse's giving.

Here with a sigh, as if her heart would break,
She throws forth Tarquin's name: 'He, he,' she says,
But more than 'he' her poor tongue could not speak;
Till after many accents and delays,
Untimely breathings, sick and short assays,
  She utters this: 'He, he, fair lords, 'tis he,
  That guides this hand to give this wound to me.'

Even here she sheathed in her harmless breast
A harmful knife, that thence her soul unsheath'd:
That blow did bail it from the deep unrest
Of that polluted prison where it breath'd:
Her contrite sighs unto the clouds bequeath'd
  Her winged sprite, and through her wounds doth fly
  Life's lasting date from cancell'd destiny.

Stone-still, astonish'd with this deadly deed,
Stood Collatine and all his lordly crew;
Till Lucrece' father that beholds her bleed,
Himself on her self-slaughter'd body threw;
And from the purple fountain Brutus drew
  The murderous knife, and, as it left the place,
  Her blood, in poor revenge, held it in chase;

And bubbling from her breast, it doth divide
In two slow rivers, that the crimson blood
Circles her body in on every side,
Who, like a late-sack'd island, vastly stood
Bare and unpeopled, in this fearful flood.
  Some of her blood still pure and red remain'd,
  And some look'd black, and that false Tarquin stain'd.

About the mourning and congealed face
Of that black blood a watery rigol goes,
Which seems to weep upon the tainted place:
And ever since, as pitying Lucrece' woes,
Corrupted blood some watery token shows;
  And blood untainted still doth red abide,
  Blushing at that which is so putrified.

'Daughter, dear daughter,' old Lucretius cries,
'That life was mine which thou hast here depriv'd.
If in the child the father's image lies,
Where shall I live now Lucrece is unliv'd?
Thou wast not to this end from me deriv'd
  If children pre-decease progenitors,
  We are their offspring, and they none of ours.

'Poor broken glass, I often did behold
In thy sweet semblance my old age new born;
But now that fair fresh mirror, dim and old,
Shows me a bare-bon'd death by time outworn;
O, from thy cheeks my image thou hast torn!
  And shiver'd all the beauty of my glass,
  That I no more can see what once I was!

'O time, cease thou thy course and last no longer,
If they surcease to be that should survive.
Shall rotten death make conquest of the stronger,
And leave the faltering feeble souls alive?
The old bees die, the young possess their hive:
  Then live, sweet Lucrece, live again, and see
  Thy father die, and not thy father thee!'

By this starts Collatine as from a dream,
And bids Lucretius give his sorrow place;
And then in key-cold Lucrece' bleeding stream
He falls, and bathes the pale fear in his face,
And counterfeits to die with her a space;
  Till manly shame bids him possess his breath,
  And live, to be revenged on her death.

The deep vexation of his inward soul
Hath serv'd a dumb arrest upon his tongue;
Who, mad that sorrow should his use control,
Or keep him from heart-easing words so long,
Begins to talk; but through his lips do throng
  Weak words, so thick come in his poor heart's aid,
  That no man could distinguish what he said.

Yet sometime 'Tarquin' was pronounced plain,
But through his teeth, as if the name he tore.
This windy tempest, till it blow up rain,
Held back his sorrow's tide, to make it more;
At last it rains, and busy winds give o'er:
  Then son and father weep with equal strife,
  Who should weep most, for daughter or for wife.

The one doth call her his, the other his,
Yet neither may possess the claim they lay,
The father says 'She's mine,' 'O, mine she is,'
Replies her husband: 'do not take away
My sorrow's interest; let no mourner say
  He weeps for her, for she was only mine,
  And only must be wail'd by Collatine.'

'O,' quoth Lucretius, 'I did give that life
Which she too early and too late hath spill'd.'
'Woe, woe,' quoth Collatine, 'she was my wife,
I owed her, and 'tis mine that she hath kill'd.'
'My daughter' and 'my wife' with clamours fill'd
  The dispers'd air, who, holding Lucrece' life,
  Answer'd their cries, 'My daughter!' and 'My wife!'

Brutus, who pluck'd the knife from Lucrece' side,
Seeing such emulation in their woe,
Began to clothe his wit in state and pride,
Burying in Lucrece' wound his folly's show.
He with the Romans was esteemed so
  As silly-jeering idiots are with kings,
  For sportive words, and uttering foolish things:

But now he throws that shallow habit by,
Wherein deep policy did him disguise;
And arm'd his long-hid wits advisedly,
To check the tears in Collatinus' eyes.
'Thou wronged lord of Rome,' quoth he, 'arise;
  Let my unsounded self, suppos'd a fool,
  Now set thy long-experienc'd wit to school.

'Why, Collatine, is woe the cure for woe?
Do wounds help wounds, or grief help grievous deeds?
Is it revenge to give thyself a blow,
For his foul act by whom thy fair wife bleeds?
Such childish humour from weak minds proceeds:
  Thy wretched wife mistook the matter so,
  To slay herself, that should have slain her foe.

'Courageous Roman, do not steep thy heart
In such relenting dew of lamentations,
But kneel with me, and help to bear thy part,
To rouse our Roman gods with invocations,
That they will suffer these abominations,
 (Since Rome herself in them doth stand disgrac'd,)
  By our strong arms from forth her fair streets chas'd.

'Now, by the Capitol that we adore,
And by this chaste blood so unjustly stain'd,
By heaven's fair sun that breeds the fat earth's store,
By all our country rights in Rome maintain'd,
And by chaste Lucrece' soul that late complain'd
  Her wrongs to us, and by this bloody knife,
  We will revenge the death of this true wife.'

This said, he struck his hand upon his breast,
And kiss'd the fatal knife, to end his vow;
And to his protestation urg'd the rest,
Who, wondering at him, did his words allow;
Then jointly to the ground their knees they bow;
  And that deep vow, which Brutus made before,
  He doth again repeat, and that they swore.

When they had sworn to this advised doom,
They did conclude to bear dead Lucrece thence;
To show her bleeding body thorough Rome,
And so to publish Tarquin's foul offence:
Which being done with speedy diligence,
  The Romans plausibly did give consent
  To Tarquin's everlasting banishment.






 VENUS AND ADONIS



            _Vilia miretur vulgus; mihi flavus Apollo
            Pocula Castalia plena ministret aqua._




TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE
HENRY WRIOTHESLEY,  EARL OF SOUTHAMPTON,
and Baron of Titchfield.

Right Honourable, I know not how I shall offend in dedicating my
unpolished lines to your lordship, nor how the world will censure me
for choosing so strong a prop to support so weak a burthen: only, if
your honour seem but pleased, I account myself highly praised, and vow
to take advantage of all idle hours, till I have honoured you with some
graver labour. But if the first heir of my invention prove deformed, I
shall be sorry it had so noble a godfather, and never after ear so
barren a land, for fear it yield me still so bad a harvest. I leave it
to your honourable survey, and your honour to your hearts content;
which I wish may always answer your own wish and the worlds hopeful
expectation.

Your honours in all duty,
WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE.






 VENUS AND ADONIS

Even as the sun with purple-colourd face
Had taen his last leave of the weeping morn,
Rose-cheekd Adonis tried him to the chase;
Hunting he lovd, but love he laughd to scorn;        4
  Sick-thoughted Venus makes amain unto him,
  And like a bold-facd suitor gins to woo him.

Thrice fairer than myself, thus she began,
The fields chief flower, sweet above compare,        8
Stain to all nymphs, more lovely than a man,
More white and red than doves or roses are:
  Nature that made thee, with herself at strife,
  Saith that the world hath ending with thy life.     12

Vouchsafe, thou wonder, to alight thy steed,
And rein his proud head to the saddle-bow;
If thou wilt deign this favour, for thy meed
A thousand honey secrets shalt thou know:             16
  Here come and sit, where never serpent hisses,
  And being set, Ill smother thee with kisses.

And yet not cloy thy lips with loathd satiety,
But rather famish them amid their plenty,             20
Making them red, and pale, with fresh variety:
Ten kisses short as one, one long as twenty:
  A summers day will seem an hour but short,
  Being wasted in such time-beguiling sport.         24

With this she seizeth on his sweating palm,
The precedent of pith and livelihood,
And trembling in her passion, calls it balm,
Earths sovereign salve to do a goddess good:         28
  Being so enragd, desire doth lend her force
  Courageously to pluck him from his horse.

Over one arm the lusty coursers rein,
Under her other was the tender boy,                   32
Who blushd and pouted in a dull disdain,
With leaden appetite, unapt to toy;
  She red and hot as coals of glowing fire,
  He red for shame, but frosty in desire.             36

The studded bridle on a ragged bough
Nimbly she fastens;O! how quick is love!
The steed is stalled up, and even now
To tie the rider she begins to prove:                 40
  Backward she pushd him, as she would be thrust,
  And governd him in strength, though not in lust.

So soon was she along, as he was down,
Each leaning on their elbows and their hips:          44
Now doth she stroke his cheek, now doth he frown,
And gins to chide, but soon she stops his lips,
  And kissing speaks, with lustful language broken,
  If thou wilt chide, thy lips shall never open.    48

He burns with bashful shame, she with her tears
Doth quench the maiden burning of his cheeks;
Then with her windy sighs and golden hairs
To fan and blow them dry again she seeks.             52
  He saith she is immodest, blames her miss;
  What follows more, she murders with a kiss.

Even as an empty eagle, sharp by fast,
Tires with her beak on feathers, flesh and bone,      56
Shaking her wings, devouring all in haste,
Till either gorge be stuffd or prey be gone:
  Even so she kissd his brow, his cheek, his chin,
  And where she ends she doth anew begin.             60

Forcd to content, but never to obey,
Panting he lies, and breatheth in her face.
She feedeth on the steam, as on a prey,
And calls it heavenly moisture, air of grace,         64
  Wishing her cheeks were gardens full of flowers
  So they were dewd with such distilling showers.

Look how a bird lies tangled in a net,
So fastend in her arms Adonis lies;                  68
Pure shame and awd resistance made him fret,
Which bred more beauty in his angry eyes:
  Rain added to a river that is rank
  Perforce will force it overflow the bank.           72

Still she entreats, and prettily entreats,
For to a pretty ear she tunes her tale.
Still is he sullen, still he lours and frets,
Twixt crimson shame and anger ashy pale;             76
  Being red she loves him best, and being white,
  Her best is betterd with a more delight.

Look how he can, she cannot choose but love;
And by her fair immortal hand she swears,             80
From his soft bosom never to remove,
Till he take truce with her contending tears,
  Which long have raind, making her cheeks all wet;
  And one sweet kiss shall pay this countless debt.

Upon this promise did he raise his chin,               85
Like a dive-dapper peering through a wave,
Who, being lookd on, ducks as quickly in;
So offers he to give what she did crave,               88
  But when her lips were ready for his pay,
  He winks, and turns his lips another way.

Never did passenger in summers heat
More thirst for drink than she for this good turn.    92
Her help she sees, but help she cannot get;
She bathes in water, yet her fire must burn:
  O! pity, gan she cry, flint-hearted boy,
  Tis but a kiss I beg; why art thou coy?            96

I have been wood as I entreat thee now,
Even by the stern and direful god of war,
Whose sinewy neck in battle neer did bow,
Who conquers where he comes in every jar;             100
  Yet hath he been my captive and my slave,
  And beggd for that which thou unaskd shalt have.

Over my altars hath he hung his lance,
His batterd shield, his uncontrolled crest,          104
And for my sake hath learnd to sport and dance,
To toy, to wanton, dally, smile, and jest;
  Scorning his churlish drum and ensign red
  Making my arms his field, his tent my bed.         108

Thus he that overruld I overswayd,
Leading him prisoner in a red rose chain:
Strong-temperd steel his stronger strength obeyd,
Yet was he servile to my coy disdain.                112
  Oh be not proud, nor brag not of thy might,
  For mastring her that foild the god of fight.

Touch but my lips with those fair lips of thine,
Though mine be not so fair, yet are they red,        116
The kiss shall be thine own as well as mine:
What seest thou in the ground? hold up thy head,
  Look in mine eyeballs, there thy beauty lies;
  Then why not lips on lips, since eyes in eyes?     120

Art thou ashamd to kiss? then wink again,
And I will wink; so shall the day seem night.
Love keeps his revels where there are but twain;
Be bold to play, our sport is not in sight,          124
  These blue-veind violets whereon we lean
  Never can blab, nor know not what we mean.

The tender spring upon thy tempting lip             127
Shows thee unripe; yet mayst thou well be tasted,
Make use of time, let not advantage slip;
Beauty within itself should not be wasted,
  Fair flowers that are not gatherd in their prime
  Rot, and consume themselves in little time.         132

Were I hard-favourd, foul, or wrinkled old,
Ill-nurturd, crooked, churlish, harsh in voice,
Oerworn, despised, rheumatic, and cold,
Thick-sighted, barren, lean, and lacking juice,      136
  Then mightst thou pause, for then I were not for thee;
  But having no defects, why dost abhor me?

Thou canst not see one wrinkle in my brow,           139
Mine eyes are grey and bright, and quick in turning;
My beauty as the spring doth yearly grow,
My flesh is soft and plump, my marrow burning,
  My smooth moist hand, were it with thy hand felt,
  Would in thy palm dissolve, or seem to melt.       144

Bid me discourse, I will enchant thine ear,
Or like a fairy, trip upon the green,
Or like a nymph, with long dishevelld hair,
Dance on the sands, and yet no footing seen.         148
  Love is a spirit all compact of fire,
  Not gross to sink, but light, and will aspire.

Witness this primrose bank whereon I lie:           151
These forceless flowers like sturdy trees support me;
Two strengthless doves will draw me through the sky,
From morn till night, even where I list to sport me.
  Is love so light, sweet boy, and may it be
  That thou shouldst think it heavy unto thee?       156

Is thine own heart to thine own face affected?
Can thy right hand seize love upon thy left?
Then woo thyself, be of thyself rejected,
Steal thine own freedom, and complain on theft.      160
  Narcissus so himself himself forsook,
  And died to kiss his shadow in the brook.

Torches are made to light, jewels to wear,
Dainties to taste, fresh beauty for the use,         164
Herbs for their smell, and sappy plants to bear;
Things growing to themselves are growths abuse,
  Seeds spring from seeds, and beauty breedeth beauty;
  Thou wast begot; to get it is thy duty.            168

Upon the earths increase why shouldst thou feed,
Unless the earth with thy increase be fed?
By law of nature thou art bound to breed,
That thine may live when thou thyself art dead;      172
  And so in spite of death thou dost survive,
  In that thy likeness still is left alive.

By this the love-sick queen began to sweat,
For where they lay the shadow had forsook them,      176
And Titan, tired in the midday heat,
With burning eye did hotly overlook them,
  Wishing Adonis had his team to guide,
  So he were like him and by Venus side.            180

And now Adonis with a lazy spright,
And with a heavy, dark, disliking eye,
His louring brows oerwhelming his fair sight,
Like misty vapours when they blot the sky,           184
  Souring his cheeks, cries, Fie, no more of love:
  The sun doth burn my face; I must remove.

Ay me, quoth Venus, young, and so unkind!
What bare excuses makst thou to be gone!            188
Ill sigh celestial breath, whose gentle wind
Shall cool the heat of this descending sun:
  Ill make a shadow for thee of my hairs;
  If they burn too, Ill quench them with my tears.  192

The sun that shines from heaven shines but warm,
And lo I lie between that sun and thee:
The heat I have from thence doth little harm,
Thine eye darts forth the fire that burneth me;      196
  And were I not immortal, life were done,
  Between this heavenly and earthly sun.

Art thou obdurate, flinty, hard as steel?
Nay more than flint, for stone at rain relenteth:    200
Art thou a womans son and canst not feel
What tis to love, how want of love tormenteth?
  O had thy mother borne so hard a mind,
  She had not brought forth thee, but died unkind.   204

What am I that thou shouldst contemn me this?
Or what great danger dwells upon my suit?
What were thy lips the worse for one poor kiss?
Speak, fair; but speak fair words, or else be mute:  208
  Give me one kiss, Ill give it thee again,
  And one for intrest, if thou wilt have twain.

Fie, lifeless picture, cold and senseless stone,
Well-painted idol, image dull and dead,              212
Statue contenting but the eye alone,
Thing like a man, but of no woman bred:
  Thou art no man, though of a mans complexion,
  For men will kiss even by their own direction.    216

This said, impatience chokes her pleading tongue,
And swelling passion doth provoke a pause;
Red cheeks and fiery eyes blaze forth her wrong;
Being judge in love, she cannot right her cause.     220
  And now she weeps, and now she fain would speak,
  And now her sobs do her intendments break.

Sometimes she shakes her head, and then his hand,
Now gazeth she on him, now on the ground;            224
Sometimes her arms infold him like a band:
She would, he will not in her arms be bound;
  And when from thence he struggles to be gone,
  She locks her lily fingers one in one.             228

Fondling, she saith, since I have hemmd thee here
Within the circuit of this ivory pale,
Ill be a park, and thou shalt be my deer;
Feed where thou wilt, on mountain or in dale:        232
  Graze on my lips, and if those hills be dry,
  Stray lower, where the pleasant fountains lie.

Within this limit is relief enough,
Sweet bottom grass and high delightful plain,        236
Round rising hillocks, brakes obscure and rough,
To shelter thee from tempest and from rain:
  Then be my deer, since I am such a park,           239
  No dog shall rouse thee, though a thousand bark.

At this Adonis smiles as in disdain,
That in each cheek appears a pretty dimple;
Love made those hollows, if himself were slain,
He might be buried in a tomb so simple;              244
  Foreknowing well, if there he came to lie,
  Why there love livd, and there he could not die.

These lovely caves, these round enchanting pits,
Opend their mouths to swallow Venus liking.        248
Being mad before, how doth she now for wits?
Struck dead at first, what needs a second striking?
  Poor queen of love, in thine own law forlorn,
  To love a cheek that smiles at thee in scorn!      252

Now which way shall she turn? what shall she say?
Her words are done, her woes the more increasing;
The time is spent, her object will away,
And from her twining arms doth urge releasing:       256
  Pity, she cries; some favour, some remorse!
  Away he springs, and hasteth to his horse.

But lo from forth a copse that neighbours by,
A breeding jennet, lusty, young, and proud,          260
Adonis tramping courser doth espy,
And forth she rushes, snorts and neighs aloud:
  The strong-neckd steed, being tied unto a tree,
  Breaketh his rein, and to her straight goes he.    264

Imperiously he leaps, he neighs, he bounds,
And now his woven girths he breaks asunder;
The bearing earth with his hard hoof he wounds,
Whose hollow womb resounds like heavens thunder;
  The iron bit he crusheth tween his teeth,         269
  Controlling what he was controlled with.

His ears up-prickd; his braided hanging mane
Upon his compassd crest now stand on end;           272
His nostrils drink the air, and forth again,
As from a furnace, vapours doth he send:
  His eye, which scornfully glisters like fire,
  Shows his hot courage and his high desire.         276

Sometime he trots, as if he told the steps,
With gentle majesty and modest pride;
Anon he rears upright, curvets and leaps,
As who should say, Lo thus my strength is tried;
  And this I do to captivate the eye                 281
  Of the fair breeder that is standing by.

What recketh he his riders angry stir,
His flattering Holla, or his Stand, I say?       284
What cares he now for curb or pricking spur?
For rich caparisons or trappings gay?
  He sees his love, and nothing else he sees,
  Nor nothing else with his proud sight agrees.      288

Look when a painter would surpass the life,
In limning out a well-proportiond steed,
His art with natures workmanship at strife,
As if the dead the living should exceed:             292
  So did this horse excel a common one,
  In shape, in courage, colour, pace and bone.

Round-hoofd, short-jointed, fetlocks shag and long,
Broad breast, full eye, small head, and nostril wide,
High crest, short ears, straight legs and passing strong,
Thin mane, thick tail, broad buttock, tender hide:
  Look, what a horse should have he did not lack,
  Save a proud rider on so proud a back.             300

Sometimes he scuds far off, and there he stares;
Anon he starts at stirring of a feather:
To bid the wind a base he now prepares,
And where he run or fly they know not whether;       304
  For through his mane and tail the high wind sings,
  Fanning the hairs, who wave like featherd wings.

He looks upon his love, and neighs unto her;
She answers him as if she knew his mind,             308
Being proud, as females are, to see him woo her,
She puts on outward strangeness, seems unkind,
  Spurns at his love and scorns the heat he feels,
  Beating his kind embracements with her heels.      312

Then like a melancholy malcontent,
He vails his tail that like a falling plume,
Cool shadow to his melting buttock lent:
He stamps, and bites the poor flies in his fume.     316
  His love, perceiving how he was enragd,
  Grew kinder, and his fury was assuagd.

His testy master goeth about to take him,
When lo the unbackd breeder, full of fear,         320
Jealous of catching, swiftly doth forsake him,
With her the horse, and left Adonis there:
  As they were mad, unto the wood they hie them,
  Outstripping crows that strive to overfly them.    324

All swoln with chafing, down Adonis sits,
Banning his boisterous and unruly beast;
And now the happy season once more fits
That love-sick love by pleading may be blest;        328
  For lovers say, the heart hath treble wrong,
  When it is barrd the aidance of the tongue.

An oven that is stoppd, or river stayd,
Burneth more hotly, swelleth with more rage:         332
So of concealed sorrow may be said,
Free vent of words loves fire doth assuage;
  But when the hearts attorney once is mute,
  The client breaks, as desperate in his suit.       336

He sees her coming, and begins to glow,
Even as a dying coal revives with wind,
And with his bonnet hides his angry brow,
Looks on the dull earth with disturbed mind,         340
  Taking no notice that she is so nigh,
  For all askance he holds her in his eye.

O what a sight it was, wistly to view
How she came stealing to the wayward boy,            344
To note the fighting conflict of her hue,
How white and red each other did destroy:
  But now her cheek was pale, and by and by
  It flashd forth fire, as lightning from the sky.  348

Now was she just before him as he sat,
And like a lowly lover down she kneels;
With one fair hand she heaveth up his hat,
Her other tender hand his fair cheek feels:          352
  His tendrer cheek receives her soft hands print,
  As apt as new-falln snow takes any dint.

Oh what a war of looks was then between them,
Her eyes petitioners to his eyes suing,              356
His eyes saw her eyes, as they had not seen them,
Her eyes wood still, his eyes disdaind the wooing:
  And all this dumb play had his acts made plain
  With tears, which, chorus-like, her eyes did rain.

Full gently now she takes him by the hand,           361
A lily prisond in a gaol of snow,
Or ivory in an alabaster band,
So white a friend engirts so white a foe:            364
  This beauteous combat, wilful and unwilling,
  Showd like two silver doves that sit a-billing.

Once more the engine of her thoughts began:
O fairest mover on this mortal round,               368
Would thou wert as I am, and I a man,
My heart all whole as thine, thy heart my wound,
  For one sweet look thy help I would assure thee,
  Though nothing but my bodys bane would cure thee.

Give me my hand, saith he, why dost thou feel it?
Give me my heart, saith she, and thou shalt have it.
O give it me lest thy hard heart do steel it,
And being steeld, soft sighs can never grave it.    376
  Then loves deep groans I never shall regard,
  Because Adonis heart hath made mine hard.

For shame, he cries, let go, and let me go,
My days delight is past, my horse is gone,          380
And tis your fault I am bereft him so,
I pray you hence, and leave me here alone,
  For all my mind, my thought, my busy care,
  Is how to get my palfrey from the mare.           384

Thus she replies: Thy palfrey as he should,
Welcomes the warm approach of sweet desire,
Affection is a coal that must be coold;
Else, sufferd, it will set the heart on fire,       388
  The sea hath bounds, but deep desire hath none;
  Therefore no marvel though thy horse be gone.

How like a jade he stood tied to the tree,
Servilely masterd with a leathern rein!             392
But when he saw his love, his youths fair fee,
He held such petty bondage in disdain;
  Throwing the base thong from his bending crest,
  Enfranchising his mouth, his back, his breast.     396

Who sees his true-love in her naked bed,
Teaching the sheets a whiter hue than white,
But when his glutton eye so full hath fed,
His other agents aim at like delight?                400
  Who is so faint that dare not be so bold
  To touch the fire, the weather being cold?

Let me excuse thy courser, gentle boy,
And learn of him, I heartily beseech thee,           404
To take advantage on presented joy,
Though I were dumb, yet his proceedings teach thee.
  O learn to love, the lesson is but plain,
  And once made perfect, never lost again.          408

I know not love, quoth he, nor will not know it,
Unless it be a boar, and then I chase it;
Tis much to borrow, and I will not owe it;
My love to love is love but to disgrace it;          412
  For I have heard, it is a life in death,
  That laughs and weeps, and all but with a breath.

Who wears a garment shapeless and unfinishd?
Who plucks the bud before one leaf put forth?        416
If springing things be any jot diminishd,
They wither in their prime, prove nothing worth;
  The colt thats backd and burdend being young,
  Loseth his pride, and never waxeth strong.         420

You hurt my hand with wringing. Let us part,
And leave this idle theme, this bootless chat:
Remove your siege from my unyielding heart,
To loves alarms it will not ope the gate:           424
  Dismiss your vows, your feigned tears, your flattry;
  For where a heart is hard they make no battry.

What! canst thou talk? quoth she, hast thou a tongue?
O would thou hadst not, or I had no hearing;        428
Thy mermaids voice hath done me double wrong;
I had my load before, now pressd with bearing:
  Melodious discord, heavenly tune, harsh-sounding,
  Ears deep sweet music, and hearts deep sore wounding.

Had I no eyes but ears, my ears would love          433
That inward beauty and invisible;
Or were I deaf, thy outward parts would move
Each part in me that were but sensible:              436
  Though neither eyes nor ears, to hear nor see,
  Yet should I be in love by touching thee.

Say that the sense of feeling were bereft me,
And that I could not see, nor hear, nor touch,       440
And nothing but the very smell were left me,
Yet would my love to thee be still as much;
  For from the stillitory of thy face excelling
  Comes breath perfumd, that breedeth love by smelling.

But oh what banquet wert thou to the taste,         445
Being nurse and feeder of the other four;
Would they not wish the feast might ever last,
And bid suspicion double-lock the door,
  Lest jealousy, that sour unwelcome guest,
  Should by his stealing in disturb the feast?      448

Once more the ruby-colourd portal opend,
Which to his speech did honey passage yield,         452
Like a red morn that ever yet betokend
Wrack to the seaman, tempest to the field,
  Sorrow to shepherds, woe unto the birds,
  Gusts and foul flaws to herdmen and to herds.      456

This ill presage advisedly she marketh:
Even as the wind is hushd before it raineth,
Or as the wolf doth grin before he barketh,
Or as the berry breaks before it staineth,           460
  Or like the deadly bullet of a gun,
  His meaning struck her ere his words begun.

And at his look she flatly falleth down
For looks kill love, and love by looks reviveth;     464
A smile recures the wounding of a frown;
But blessed bankrout, that by love so thriveth!
  The silly boy, believing she is dead,
  Claps her pale cheek, till clapping makes it red.  468

And all amazd brake off his late intent,
For sharply he did think to reprehend her,
Which cunning love did wittily prevent:
Fair fall the wit that can so well defend her!       472
  For on the grass she lies as she were slain,
  Till his breath breatheth life in her again.

He wrings her nose, he strikes her on the cheeks,
He bends her fingers, holds her pulses hard,         476
He chafes her lips; a thousand ways he seeks
To mend the hurt that his unkindness marrd:
  He kisses her; and she, by her good will,
  Will never rise, so he will kiss her still.        480

The night of sorrow now is turnd to day:
Her two blue windows faintly she up-heaveth,
Like the fair sun when in his fresh array
He cheers the morn, and all the world relieveth:     484
  And as the bright sun glorifies the sky,
  So is her face illumind with her eye.

Whose beams upon his hairless face are fixd,
As if from thence they borrowd all their shine.     488
Were never four such lamps together mixd,
Had not his clouded with his brows repine;
  But hers, which through the crystal tears gave light
  Shone like the moon in water seen by night.        492

O where am I? quoth she, in earth or heaven?
Or in the ocean drenchd, or in the fire?
What hour is this? or morn or weary even?
Do I delight to die, or life desire?                 496
  But now I livd, and life was deaths annoy;
  But now I died, and death was lively joy.

O thou didst kill me; kill me once again:
Thy eyes shrewd tutor, that hard heart of thine,    500
Hath taught them scornful tricks, and such disdain,
That they have murderd this poor heart of mine;
  And these mine eyes, true leaders to their queen,
  But for thy piteous lips no more had seen.         504

Long may they kiss each other for this cure!
Oh never let their crimson liveries wear,
And as they last, their verdure still endure,
To drive infection from the dangerous year:          508
  That the star-gazers, having writ on death,
  May say, the plague is banishd by thy breath.

Pure lips, sweet seals in my soft lips imprinted,
What bargains may I make, still to be sealing?       512
To sell myself I can be well contented,
So thou wilt buy, and pay, and use good dealing;
  Which purchase if thou make, for fear of slips,
  Set thy seal manual on my wax-red lips.            516

A thousand kisses buys my heart from me;
And pay them at thy leisure, one by one,
What is ten hundred touches unto thee?
Are they not quickly told and quickly gone?          520
  Say, for non-payment that the debt should double,
  Is twenty hundred kisses such a trouble?

Fair queen, quoth he, if any love you owe me,
Measure my strangeness with my unripe years:         524
Before I know myself, seek not to know me;
No fisher but the ungrown fry forbears:
  The mellow plum doth fall, the green sticks fast,
  Or being early pluckd, is sour to taste.          528

Look the worlds comforter, with weary gait
His days hot task hath ended in the west;
The owl, nights herald, shrieks, tis very late;
The sheep are gone to fold, birds to their nest,     532
  And coal-black clouds that shadow heavens light
  Do summon us to part, and bid good night.

Now let me say good night, and so say you;
If you will say so, you shall have a kiss.          536
Good night, quoth she; and ere he says adieu,
The honey fee of parting tenderd is:
  Her arms do lend his neck a sweet embrace;
  Incorporate then they seem, face grows to face.    540

Till breathless he disjoind, and backward drew
The heavenly moisture, that sweet coral mouth,
Whose precious taste her thirsty lips well knew,
Whereon they surfeit, yet complain on drouth,        544
  He with her plenty pressd, she faint with dearth,
  Their lips together glued, fall to the earth.

Now quick desire hath caught the yielding prey,
And glutton-like she feeds, yet never filleth;       548
Her lips are conquerors, his lips obey,
Paying what ransom the insulter willeth;
  Whose vulture thought doth pitch the price so high,
  That she will draw his lips rich treasure dry.    552

And having felt the sweetness of the spoil,
With blindfold fury she begins to forage;
Her face doth reek and smoke, her blood doth boil,
And careless lust stirs up a desperate courage,      556
  Planting oblivion, beating reason back,
  Forgetting shames pure blush and honours wrack.

Hot, faint, and weary, with her hard embracing,
Like a wild bird being tamd with too much handling,
Or as the fleet-foot roe thats tird with chasing,  561
Or like the froward infant stilld with dandling:
  He now obeys, and now no more resisteth,
  While she takes all she can, not all she listeth.  564

What wax so frozen but dissolves with tempring,
And yields at last to every light impression?
Things out of hope are compassd oft with ventring,
Chiefly in love, whose leave exceeds commission:     568
  Affection faints not like a pale-facd coward,
  But then woos best when most his choice is froward.

When he did frown, O had she then gave over,
Such nectar from his lips she had not suckd.        572
Foul words and frowns must not repel a lover;
What though the rose have prickles, yet tis pluckd.
  Were beauty under twenty locks kept fast,
  Yet love breaks through, and picks them all at last.

For pity now she can no more detain him;             577
The poor fool prays her that he may depart:
She is resolvd no longer to restrain him,
Bids him farewell, and look well to her heart,       580
  The which by Cupids bow she doth protest,
  He carries thence encaged in his breast.

Sweet boy, she says, this night Ill waste in sorrow,
For my sick heart commands mine eyes to watch.       584
Tell me, loves master, shall we meet tomorrow
Say, shall we? shall we? wilt thou make the match?
  He tells her no, tomorrow he intends
  To hunt the boar with certain of his friends.      588

The boar! quoth she; whereat a sudden pale,
Like lawn being spread upon the blushing rose,
Usurps her cheek, she trembles at his tale,
And on his neck her yoking arms she throws.          592
  She sinketh down, still hanging by his neck,
  He on her belly falls, she on her back.

Now is she in the very lists of love,
Her champion mounted for the hot encounter:          596
All is imaginary she doth prove,
He will not manage her, although he mount her;
  That worse than Tantalus is her annoy,
  To clip Elysium and to lack her joy.               600

Even as poor birds, deceivd with painted grapes,
Do surfeit by the eye and pine the maw:
Even so she languisheth in her mishaps,
As those poor birds that helpless berries saw.       604
  The warm effects which she in him finds missing,
  She seeks to kindle with continual kissing.

But all in vain, good queen, it will not be,
She hath assayd as much as may be provd;           608
Her pleading hath deservd a greater fee;
Shes love, she loves, and yet she is not lovd.
  Fie, fie, he says, you crush me; let me go;
  You have no reason to withhold me so.             612

Thou hadst been gone, quoth she, sweet boy, ere this,
But that thou toldst me thou wouldst hunt the boar.
Oh be advisd; thou knowst not what it is,
With javelins point a churlish swine to gore,       616
  Whose tushes never sheathd he whetteth still,
  Like to a mortal butcher, bent to kill.

On his bow-back he hath a battle set
Of bristly pikes, that ever threat his foes;         620
His eyes like glow-worms shine when he doth fret;
His snout digs sepulchres whereer he goes;
  Being movd, he strikes whateer is in his way,
  And whom he strikes his crooked tushes slay.       624

His brawny sides, with hairy bristles armed,
Are better proof than thy spears point can enter;
His short thick neck cannot be easily harmed;
Being ireful, on the lion he will venture:           628
  The thorny brambles and embracing bushes,
  As fearful of him, part, through whom he rushes.

Alas! he naught esteems that face of thine,
To which loves eyes pay tributary gazes;            632
Nor thy soft hands, sweet lips, and crystal eyne,
Whose full perfection all the world amazes;
  But having thee at vantage, wondrous dread!
  Would root these beauties as he roots the mead.

Oh let him keep his loathsome cabin still,          637
Beauty hath naught to do with such foul fiends:
Come not within his danger by thy will;
They that thrive well, take counsel of their friends.
  When thou didst name the boar, not to dissemble,
  I feard thy fortune, and my joints did tremble.

Didst thou not mark my face, was it not white?
Sawst thou not signs of fear lurk in mine eye?      644
Grew I not faint, and fell I not downright?
Within my bosom, whereon thou dost lie,
  My boding heart pants, beats, and takes no rest,
  But like an earthquake, shakes thee on my breast.

For where love reigns, disturbing jealousy          649
Doth call himself affections sentinel;
Gives false alarms, suggesteth mutiny,
And in a peaceful hour doth cry Kill, kill!        652
  Distempring gentle love in his desire,
  As air and water do abate the fire.

This sour informer, this bate-breeding spy,
This canker that eats up loves tender spring,       656
This carry-tale, dissentious jealousy,
That sometime true news, sometime false doth bring,
  Knocks at my heart, and whispers in mine ear,
  That if I love thee, I thy death should fear.      660

And more than so, presenteth to mine eye
The picture of an angry chafing boar,
Under whose sharp fangs on his back doth lie
An image like thyself, all staind with gore;        664
  Whose blood upon the fresh flowers being shed,
  Doth make them droop with grief and hang the head.

What should I do, seeing thee so indeed,
That tremble at thimagination?                      668
The thought of it doth make my faint heart bleed,
And fear doth teach it divination:
  I prophesy thy death, my living sorrow,
  If thou encounter with the boar tomorrow.          672

But if thou needs wilt hunt, be ruld by me;
Uncouple at the timorous flying hare,
Or at the fox which lives by subtilty,
Or at the roe which no encounter dare:               676
  Pursue these fearful creatures oer the downs,
  And on thy well-breathd horse keep with thy hounds.

And when thou hast on foot the purblind hare,
Mark the poor wretch, to overshoot his troubles      680
How he outruns the wind, and with what care
He cranks and crosses with a thousand doubles:
  The many musits through the which he goes
  Are like a labyrinth to amaze his foes.            684

Sometime he runs among a flock of sheep,
To make the cunning hounds mistake their smell,
And sometime where earth-delving conies keep,
To stop the loud pursuers in their yell,             688
  And sometime sorteth with a herd of deer;
  Danger deviseth shifts, wit waits on fear.

For there his smell with others being mingled,      691
The hot scent-snuffing hounds are driven to doubt,
Ceasing their clamorous cry, till they have singled
With much ado the cold fault cleanly out;
  Then do they spend their mouths: echo replies,
  As if another chase were in the skies.             696

By this, poor Wat, far off upon a hill,
Stands on his hinder legs with listning ear,
To hearken if his foes pursue him still.
Anon their loud alarums he doth hear;                700
  And now his grief may be compared well
  To one sore sick that hears the passing bell.

Then shalt thou see the dew-bedabbled wretch
Turn, and return, indenting with the way,            704
Each envious briar his weary legs do scratch,
Each shadow makes him stop, each murmur stay:
  For misery is trodden on by many,
  And being low never relievd by any.               708

Lie quietly, and hear a little more;
Nay, do not struggle, for thou shalt not rise:
To make thee hate the hunting of the boar,
Unlike myself thou hearst me moralize,              712
  Applying this to that, and so to so,
  For love can comment upon every woe.

Where did I leave? No matter where, quoth he
Leave me, and then the story aptly ends:            716
The night is spent. Why, what of that? quoth she.
I am, quoth he, expected of my friends;
  And now tis dark, and going I shall fall.
  In night, quoth she, desire sees best of all.  720

But if thou fall, oh then imagine this,
The earth, in love with thee, thy footing trips,
And all is but to rob thee of a kiss.                723
Rich preys make true men thieves; so do thy lips
  Make modest Dian cloudy and forlorn,
  Lest she should steal a kiss and die forsworn.

Now of this dark night I perceive the reason:
Cynthia for shame obscures her silver shine          728
Till forging nature be condemnd of treason,
For stealing moulds from heaven, that were divine;
  Wherein she framd thee, in high heavens despite,
  To shame the sun by day and her by night.          732

And therefore hath she bribd the destinies,
To cross the curious workmanship of nature,
To mingle beauty with infirmities,
And pure perfection with impure defeature,           736
  Making it subject to the tyranny
  Of mad mischances and much misery.

As burning fevers, agues pale and faint,
Life-poisoning pestilence and frenzies wood,         740
The marrow-eating sickness, whose attaint
Disorder breeds by heating of the blood;
  Surfeits, imposthumes, grief, and damnd despair,
  Swear natures death, for framing thee so fair.    744

And not the least of all these maladies
But in one minutes fight brings beauty under:
Both favour, savour, hue and qualities,
Whereat thimpartial gazer late did wonder,          748
  Are on the sudden wasted, thawd and done,
  As mountain snow melts with the midday sun.

Therefore despite of fruitless chastity,
Love-lacking vestals and self-loving nuns,           752
That on the earth would breed a scarcity
And barren dearth of daughters and of sons,
  Be prodigal: the lamp that burns by night
  Dries up his oil to lend the world his light.      756

What is thy body but a swallowing grave,
Seeming to bury that posterity,
Which by the rights of time thou needs must have,
If thou destroy them not in dark obscurity?          760
  If so, the world will hold thee in disdain,
  Sith in thy pride so fair a hope is slain.

So in thyself thyself art made away;
A mischief worse than civil home-bred strife,        764
Or theirs whose desperate hands themselves do slay,
Or butcher sire that reeves his son of life.
  Foul cankring rust the hidden treasure frets,
  But gold thats put to use more gold begets.      768

Nay then, quoth Adon, you will fall again
Into your idle over-handled theme;
The kiss I gave you is bestowd in vain,
And all in vain you strive against the stream;       772
  For by this black-facd night, desires foul nurse,
  Your treatise makes me like you worse and worse.

If love have lent you twenty thousand tongues,
And every tongue more moving than your own,          776
Bewitching like the wanton mermaids songs,
Yet from mine ear the tempting tune is blown;
  For know, my heart stands armed in mine ear,
  And will not let a false sound enter there.        780

Lest the deceiving harmony should run
Into the quiet closure of my breast,
And then my little heart were quite undone,
In his bedchamber to be barrd of rest.              784
  No, lady, no; my heart longs not to groan,
  But soundly sleeps, while now it sleeps alone.

What have you urgd that I cannot reprove?
The path is smooth that leadeth on to danger;        790
I hate not love, but your device in love
That lends embracements unto every stranger.
  You do it for increase: O strange excuse!
  When reason is the bawd to lusts abuse.           792

Call it not, love, for love to heaven is fled,
Since sweating lust on earth usurpd his name;
Under whose simple semblance he hath fed
Upon fresh beauty, blotting it with blame;           796
  Which the hot tyrant stains and soon bereaves,
  As caterpillars do the tender leaves.

Love comforteth like sunshine after rain,
But lusts effect is tempest after sun;              800
Loves gentle spring doth always fresh remain,
Lusts winter comes ere summer half be done.
  Love surfeits not, lust like a glutton dies;
  Love is all truth, lust full of forged lies.       804

More I could tell, but more I dare not say;
The text is old, the orator too green.
Therefore, in sadness, now I will away;
My face is full of shame, my heart of teen,          808
  Mine ears, that to your wanton talk attended
  Do burn themselves for having so offended.

With this he breaketh from the sweet embrace         811
Of those fair arms which bound him to her breast,
And homeward through the dark laund runs apace;
Leaves love upon her back deeply distressd.
  Look how a bright star shooteth from the sky,
  So glides he in the night from Venus eye.         816

Which after him she darts, as one on shore
Gazing upon a late embarked friend,
Till the wild waves will have him seen no more,
Whose ridges with the meeting clouds contend:        820
  So did the merciless and pitchy night
  Fold in the object that did feed her sight.

Whereat amazd, as one that unaware
Hath droppd a precious jewel in the flood,          824
Or stonishd as night-wanderers often are,
Their light blown out in some mistrustful wood;
  Even so confounded in the dark she lay,
  Having lost the fair discovery of her way.         828

And now she beats her heart, whereat it groans,
That all the neighbour caves, as seeming troubled,
Make verbal repetition of her moans;
Passion on passion deeply is redoubled:              832
  Ay me! she cries, and twenty times, Woe, woe!
  And twenty echoes twenty times cry so.

She marking them, begins a wailing note,
And sings extemporally a woeful ditty;               836
How love makes young men thrall, and old men dote,
How love is wise in folly foolish witty:
  Her heavy anthem still concludes in woe,
  And still the choir of echoes answer so.           840

Her song was tedious, and outwore the night,
For lovers hours are long, though seeming short,
If pleasd themselves, others they think, delight
In such like circumstance, with such like sport:     844
  Their copious stories oftentimes begun,
  End without audience, and are never done.

For who hath she to spend the night withal,
But idle sounds resembling parasites;                848
Like shrill-tongud tapsters answering every call,
Soothing the humour of fantastic wits?
  She says, Tis so: they answer all, Tis so;
  And would say after her, if she said No.         852

Lo here the gentle lark, weary of rest,
From his moist cabinet mounts up on high,
And wakes the morning, from whose silver breast
The sun ariseth in his majesty;                      856
  Who doth the world so gloriously behold,
  That cedar tops and hills seem burnishd gold.

Venus salutes him with this fair good morrow:
Oh thou clear god, and patron of all light,         860
From whom each lamp and shining star doth borrow
The beauteous influence that makes him bright,
  There lives a son that suckd an earthly mother,
  May lend thee light, as thou dost lend to other.

This said, she hasteth to a myrtle grove,            865
Musing the morning is so much oerworn,
And yet she hears no tidings of her love;
She hearkens for his hounds and for his horn.        868
  Anon she hears them chant it lustily,
  And all in haste she coasteth to the cry.

And as she runs, the bushes in the way
Some catch her by the neck, some kiss her face,      872
Some twine about her thigh to make her stay:
She wildly breaketh from their strict embrace,
  Like a milch doe, whose swelling dugs do ache,
  Hasting to feed her fawn hid in some brake.        876

By this she hears the hounds are at a bay,
Whereat she starts like one that spies an adder
Wreathd up in fatal folds just in his way,
The fear whereof doth make him shake and shudder;    880
  Even so the timorous yelping of the hounds
  Appals her senses, and her spirit confounds.

For now she knows it is no gentle chase,
But the blunt boar, rough bear, or lion proud,       884
Because the cry remaineth in one place,
Where fearfully the dogs exclaim aloud,
  Finding their enemy to be so curst,
  They all strain courtsy who shall cope him first. 888

This dismal cry rings sadly in her ear,
Through which it enters to surprise her heart;
Who overcome by doubt and bloodless fear,
With cold-pale weakness numbs each feeling part;     892
  Like soldiers when their captain once doth yield,
  They basely fly and dare not stay the field.

Thus stands she in a trembling ecstasy,
Till cheering up her senses sore dismayd,           896
She tells them tis a causeless fantasy,
And childish error, that they are afraid;
  Bids them leave quaking, bids them fear no more:
  And with that word, she spied the hunted boar.     900

Whose frothy mouth bepainted all with red,
Like milk and blood being mingled both together,
A second fear through all her sinews spread,
Which madly hurries her she knows not whither:       904
  This way she runs, and now she will no further,
  But back retires, to rate the boar for murther.

A thousand spleens bear her a thousand ways,
She treads the path that she untreads again;         908
Her more than haste is mated with delays,
Like the proceedings of a drunken brain,
  Full of respects, yet naught at all respecting,
  In hand with all things, naught at all effecting.

Here kenneld in a brake she finds a hound,          913
And asks the weary caitiff for his master,
And there another licking of his wound,
Gainst venomd sores the only sovereign plaster.    916
  And here she meets another sadly scowling,
  To whom she speaks, and he replies with howling.

When he hath ceasd his ill-resounding noise,
Another flap-mouthd mourner, black and grim,        920
Against the welkin volleys out his voice;
Another and another answer him,
  Clapping their proud tails to the ground below,
  Shaking their scratchd ears, bleeding as they go.

Look how the worlds poor people are amazed          925
At apparitions, signs, and prodigies,
Whereon with fearful eyes they long have gazed,
Infusing them with dreadful prophecies;              928
  So she at these sad sighs draws up her breath,
  And sighing it again, exclaims on death.

Hard-favourd tyrant, ugly, meagre, lean,           931
Hateful divorce of love, thus chides she death,
Grim-grinning ghost, earths worm, what dost thou mean?
To stifle beauty and to steal his breath,
  Who when he livd, his breath and beauty set
  Gloss on the rose, smell to the violet.            936

If he be dead, O no, it cannot be,
Seeing his beauty, thou shouldst strike at it,
O yes, it may, thou hast no eyes to see,
But hatefully at random dost thou hit.               940
  Thy mark is feeble age, but thy false dart
  Mistakes that aim, and cleaves an infants heart.

Hadst thou but bid beware, then he had spoke,
And hearing him, thy power had lost his power.       944
The destinies will curse thee for this stroke;
They bid thee crop a weed, thou pluckst a flower.
  Loves golden arrow at him should have fled,
  And not deaths ebon dart to strike him dead.      948

Dost thou drink tears, that thou provokst such weeping?
What may a heavy groan advantage thee?
Why hast thou cast into eternal sleeping
Those eyes that taught all other eyes to see?        952
  Now nature cares not for thy mortal vigour,
  Since her best work is ruind with thy rigour.

Here overcome, as one full of despair,
She vaild her eyelids, who like sluices stoppd     956
The crystal tide that from her two cheeks fair
In the sweet channel of her bosom droppd
  But through the flood-gates breaks the silver rain,
  And with his strong course opens them again.       960

O how her eyes and tears did lend and borrow;
Her eyes seen in the tears, tears in her eye;
Both crystals, where they viewd each others sorrow,
Sorrow that friendly sighs sought still to dry;      964
  But like a stormy day, now wind, now rain,
  Sighs dry her cheeks, tears make them wet again.

Variable passions throng her constant woe,
As striving who should best become her grief;        968
All entertaind, each passion labours so,
That every present sorrow seemeth chief,
  But none is best, then join they all together,
  Like many clouds consulting for foul weather.      972

By this, far off she hears some huntsman holla;
A nurses song neer pleasd her babe so well:
The dire imagination she did follow
This sound of hope doth labour to expel;             976
  For now reviving joy bids her rejoice,
  And flatters her it is Adonis voice.

Whereat her tears began to turn their tide,
Being prisond in her eye, like pearls in glass;     980
Yet sometimes falls an orient drop beside,
Which her cheek melts, as scorning it should pass
  To wash the foul face of the sluttish ground,
  Who is but drunken when she seemeth drownd.

O hard-believing love, how strange it seems          985
Not to believe, and yet too credulous;
Thy weal and woe are both of them extremes;
Despair and hope make thee ridiculous,               988
  The one doth flatter thee in thoughts unlikely,
  In likely thoughts the other kills thee quickly.

Now she unweaves the web that she hath wrought,
Adonis lives, and death is not to blame;             992
It was not she that calld him all to naught;
Now she adds honours to his hateful name.
  She clepes him king of graves, and grave for kings,
  Imperious supreme of all mortal things.            996

No, no, quoth she, sweet death, I did but jest;
Yet pardon me, I felt a kind of fear
Whenas I met the boar, that bloody beast,
Which knows no pity, but is still severe;           1000
  Then, gentle shadow,truth I must confess
  I raild on thee, fearing my loves decease.

Tis not my fault, the boar provokd my tongue;
Be wreakd on him, invisible commander;             1004
Tis he, foul creature, that hath done thee wrong;
I did but act, hes author of my slander.
  Grief hath two tongues, and never woman yet,
  Could rule them both, without ten womens wit.

Thus hoping that Adonis is alive,                   1009
Her rash suspect she doth extenuate;
And that his beauty may the better thrive,
With death she humbly doth insinuate;               1012
  Tells him of trophies, statues, tombs and stories
  His victories, his triumphs and his glories.

O love! quoth she, how much a fool was I,
To be of such a weak and silly mind,                1016
To wail his death who lives, and must not die
Till mutual overthrow of mortal kind;
  For he being dead, with him is beauty slain,
  And beauty dead, black Chaos comes again.         1020

Fie, fie, fond love, thou art as full of fear
As one with treasure laden, hemmd with thieves,
Trifles unwitnessed with eye or ear,
Thy coward heart with false bethinking grieves.    1024
  Even at this word she hears a merry horn,
  Whereat she leaps that was but late forlorn.

As falcon to the lure, away she flies;
The grass stoops not, she treads on it so light,    1028
And in her haste unfortunately spies
The foul boars conquest on her fair delight;
  Which seen, her eyes, as murderd with the view,
  Like stars ashamd of day, themselves withdrew.

Or as the snail, whose tender horns being hit,      1033
Shrinks backwards in his shelly cave with pain,
And there all smotherd up, in shade doth sit,
Long after fearing to creep forth again:            1036
  So at his bloody view her eyes are fled
  Into the deep dark cabins of her head.

Where they resign their office and their light
To the disposing of her troubled brain,             1040
Who bids them still consort with ugly night,
And never wound the heart with looks again;
  Who like a king perplexed in his throne,
  By their suggestion gives a deadly groan.         1044

Whereat each tributary subject quakes,
As when the wind imprisond in the ground,
Struggling for passage, earths foundation shakes,
Which with cold terror doth mens minds confound.
  This mutiny each part doth so surprise            1049
  That from their dark beds once more leap her eyes.

And being opend, threw unwilling light
Upon the wide wound that the boar had trenchd
In his soft flank, whose wonted lily white          1053
With purple tears that his wound wept, was drenchd.
  No flower was nigh, no grass, herb, leaf or weed,
  But stole his blood and seemd with him to bleed.

This solemn sympathy poor Venus noteth,             1057
Over one shoulder doth she hang her head,
Dumbly she passions, franticly she doteth;
She thinks he could not die, he is not dead:        1060
  Her voice is stoppd, her joints forget to bow,
  Her eyes are mad, that they have wept till now.

Upon his hurt she looks so steadfastly,
That her sight dazzling makes the wound seem three;
And then she reprehends her mangling eye,           1065
That makes more gashes, where no breach should be:
  His face seems twain, each several limb is doubled,
  For oft the eye mistakes, the brain being troubled.

My tongue cannot express my grief for one,         1069
And yet, quoth she, behold two Adons dead!
My sighs are blown away, my salt tears gone,
Mine eyes are turnd to fire, my heart to lead:     1072
  Heavy hearts lead, melt at mine eyes red fire!
  So shall I die by drops of hot desire.

Alas poor world, what treasure hast thou lost!
What face remains alive thats worth the viewing?
Whose tongue is music now? what canst thou boast
Of things long since, or anything ensuing?          1078
  The flowers are sweet, their colours fresh and trim,
  But true sweet beauty livd and died with him.

Bonnet nor veil henceforth no creature wear!       1081
Nor sun nor wind will ever strive to kiss you:
Having no fair to lose, you need not fear;
The sun doth scorn you, and the wind doth hiss you.
  But when Adonis livd, sun and sharp air          1085
  Lurkd like two thieves, to rob him of his fair.

And therefore would he put his bonnet on,
Under whose brim the gaudy sun would peep;          1088
The wind would blow it off, and being gone,
Play with his locks; then would Adonis weep;
  And straight, in pity of his tender years,
  They both would strive who first should dry his tears.

To see his face the lion walkd along              1093
Behind some hedge, because he would not fear him;
To recreate himself when he hath sung,
The tiger would be tame and gently hear him.        1096
  If he had spoke, the wolf would leave his prey,
  And never fright the silly lamb that day.

When he beheld his shadow in the brook,
The fishes spread on it their golden gills;         1100
When he was by, the birds such pleasure took,
That some would sing, some other in their bills
  Would bring him mulberries and ripe-red cherries,
  He fed them with his sight, they him with berries.

But this foul, grim, and urchin-snouted boar,      1105
Whose downward eye still looketh for a grave,
Neer saw the beauteous livery that he wore;
Witness the entertainment that he gave.             1108
  If he did see his face, why then I know
  He thought to kiss him, and hath killd him so.

Tis true, tis true; thus was Adonis slain:
He ran upon the boar with his sharp spear,          1112
Who did not whet his teeth at him again,
But by a kiss thought to persuade him there;
  And nuzzling in his flank, the loving swine
  Sheathd unaware the tusk in his soft groin.      1116

Had I been toothd like him, I must confess,
With kissing him I should have killd him first;
But he is dead, and never did he bless
My youth with his; the more am I accurst.          1120
  With this she falleth in the place she stood,
  And stains her face with his congealed blood.

She looks upon his lips, and they are pale;
She takes him by the hand, and that is cold,        1124
She whispers in his ears a heavy tale,
As if they heard the woeful words she told;
She lifts the coffer-lids that close his eyes,
Where lo, two lamps burnt out in darkness lies.

Two glasses where herself herself beheld            1129
A thousand times, and now no more reflect;
Their virtue lost, wherein they late excelld,
And every beauty robbd of his effect.              1132
  Wonder of time, quoth she, this is my spite,
  That thou being dead, the day should yet be light.

Since thou art dead, lo here I prophesy,
Sorrow on love hereafter shall attend:              1136
It shall be waited on with jealousy,
Find sweet beginning, but unsavoury end;
  Neer settled equally, but high or low,
  That all loves pleasure shall not match his woe.

It shall be fickle, false and full of fraud,       1141
Bud, and be blasted in a breathing while;
The bottom poison, and the top oerstrawd
With sweets that shall the truest sight beguile.    1144
  The strongest body shall it make most weak,
  Strike the wise dumb, and teach the fool to speak.

It shall be sparing, and too full of riot,
Teaching decrepit age to tread the measures;        1148
The staring ruffian shall it keep in quiet,
Pluck down the rich, enrich the poor with treasures;
  It shall be raging mad, and silly mild,
  Make the young old, the old become a child.       1152

It shall suspect where is no cause of fear,
It shall not fear where it should most mistrust;
It shall be merciful, and too severe,
And most deceiving when it seems most just;         1156
  Perverse it shall be, where it shows most toward,
  Put fear to valour, courage to the coward.

It shall be cause of war and dire events,
And set dissension twixt the son and sire;         1160
Subject and servile to all discontents,
As dry combustious matter is to fire,
  Sith in his prime death doth my love destroy,
  They that love best their love shall not enjoy.  1164

By this the boy that by her side lay killd
Was melted like a vapour from her sight,
And in his blood that on the ground lay spilld,
A purple flower sprung up, chequerd with white,    1168
  Resembling well his pale cheeks, and the blood
  Which in round drops upon their whiteness stood.

She bows her head, the new-sprung flower to smell,
Comparing it to her Adonis breath;                 1172
And says within her bosom it shall dwell,
Since he himself is reft from her by death;
  She drops the stalk, and in the breach appears
  Green-dropping sap, which she compares to tears.

Poor flower, quoth she, this was thy fathers guise,
Sweet issue of a more sweet-smelling sire,
For every little grief to wet his eyes,
To grow unto himself was his desire,                1180
  And so tis thine; but know, it is as good
  To wither in my breast as in his blood.

Here was thy fathers bed, here in my breast;
Thou art the next of blood, and tis thy right:     1184
Lo in this hollow cradle take thy rest,
My throbbing heart shall rock thee day and night:
  There shall not be one minute in an hour
  Wherein I will not kiss my sweet loves flower.

Thus weary of the world, away she hies,             1189
And yokes her silver doves; by whose swift aid
Their mistress mounted through the empty skies,
In her light chariot quickly is conveyd;           1192
  Holding their course to Paphos, where their queen
  Means to immure herself and not be seen.


    

  FINIS
    












* CONTENT NOTE (added in 2017) *

This Project Gutenberg eBook was originally marked as having a copyright.
However, Project Gutenberg now believes that the eBook's contents does
not actually have a copyright.

This is based on current understanding of copyright law, in which
"authorship" is required to obtain a copyright.  See the "No Sweat of
the Brow Copyright" how-to at www.gutenberg.org for more details on
this.

This eBook was provided to Project Gutenberg by the World Library
Inc., which published a series of CDROM products called "Library of
the Future" from approximately 1991-1994.  Copyright registration
records filed with the U.S. Copyright Office at the time record a
copyright for "New Matter: compilation, arr., revisions and additions."

Within the INDIVIDUAL eBooks on the CDROM, this copyright statement
appears: "Electronically Enhanced Text Copyright 1991 World Library,
Inc."

There is no indication that the eBooks from the World Library are
sufficiently different from known public domain sources to warrant a
separate copyright based on new authorship.  Digitization, markup and
related activities are not authorship.  Therefore, it is the opinion
of Project Gutenberg that this eBook is in the public domain in the
U.S. based on there being no modern authorship that would be eligible
for a new copyright.

Project Gutenberg offers no opinion on copyright status elsewhere.

A search of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office in December 2017
did not indicate current trademark registry for "World Library" or
"Library of the Future."

For its historical value, the original copyright statement and
information about Project Gutenberg is included here.


"THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP."


* END CONTENT NOTE *




End of Project Gutenbergs The Complete Works of William
Shakespeare, by William Shakespeare

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE ***

***** This file should be named 100-0.txt or 100-0.zip ***** This and
all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/100/

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so
the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright royalties.
Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this
license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and
trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be
used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific
permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook,
complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly
any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances
and research. They may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU
DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the
terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all
copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. If
you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be used
on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree
to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that
you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works even without
complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C
below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement and help
preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.
See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and
you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent
you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating
derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project
Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the
Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic
works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with
the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name
associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this
agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full
Project Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with
others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, youll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a
notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright
holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United
States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or
providing access to a work with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"
associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with
the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission
for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set
forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to
the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of
obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the full
Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access
to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from the
use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method you
already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to the
owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has agreed to donate
royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following each
date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your
periodic tax returns. Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such
and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies you
in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he does not
agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm License. You must
require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the works
possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and all access
to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth
in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The Project Gutenberg
Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact
the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your
equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees.
YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY,
BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN
PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND
ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR
ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES
EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect
in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written
explanation to the person you received the work from. If you received
the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with your
written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with the
defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tms
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will remain
freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and
permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations. To
learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and
how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the
Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information
about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state
of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue
Service. The Foundations EIN or federal tax identification number is
64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S.
federal laws and your states laws.

The Foundations principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its volunteers
and employees are scattered throughout numerous locations. Its business
office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116,
(801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundations web site and official page at
www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby Chief Executive and Director gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely
distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of
equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to
$5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with
the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where
we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside
the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways
including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate,
please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone. For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:
www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm, including
how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to
our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.












Title: The Man in Black

Author: Stanley J. Weyman

Illustrator: Wal Paget

Release Date: March 28, 2012 [EBook #39295]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAN IN BLACK ***




Produced by Charles Bowen, from page scans provided by the
Web Archive (University of Toronto)











Transcriber's Notes:

   1. Page scan source:
      http://www.archive.org/details/maninblackillust00weymuoft
      (University of Toronto)






                           THE MAN IN BLACK






[Illustration: "'IF YOU WANT ME TO--DRAW HER HOROSCOPE,' THE
ASTROLOGER REPLIED" (_p_. 89).]






                                 The
                             Man in Black




                                  BY
                          STANLEY J. WEYMAN

            _Author of "A Gentleman of France" "The Story
                       of Francis Cludde" etc_.




                            Illustrated by
                      WAL PAGET AND H. M. PAGET




                            SIXTH THOUSAND




                     CASSELL AND COMPANY Limited
                      _London Paris & Melbourne_
                                 1894
                         ALL RIGHTS RESERVED






                              CONTENTS.


   CHAPTER

         I. The Fair at Fcamp.

        II. Solomon Ntredame.

       III. Man and Wife.

        IV. The House with Two Doors.

         V. The Upper Portal.

        VI. The Powder of Attraction.

       VII. Clytmnestra.

      VIII. The Mark of Cain.

        IX. Before the Court.

         X. Two Witnesses.




                        LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


   "'If you want me to draw her horoscope,' the astrologer replied."
       Frontispiece

   "The showman was counting his gains into his pouch."

   "Jehan went trembling and found the hole."

   "The astrologer rose slowly from his seat."

   "Jehan leapt back with a shriek of pain."

   "For a second the man in black stood breathless."

   "'Madame! Madame de Vidoche, if you please!'"

   "He watched her every motion."

   "In a moment he was down, writhing on the floor."

   "'Who stole him? Where has he been?'"

   "They were carrying him."

   "A man, half-naked, ... crawled on to the highroad."





                          THE MAN IN BLACK.




                              CHAPTER I.

                         The Fair At Fcamp.


"_I am Jehan de Bault, Seigneur of--I know not where, and Lord of
seventeen lordships in the County of---I forget the name, of a most
noble and puissant family, possessing the High Justice, the Middle,
and the Low. In my veins runs the blood of Roland, and of my
forefathers were three marshals of France. I stand here, the_----"

It was the eve of All Saints, and the famous autumn horse-fair was in
progress at Fcamp--Fcamp on the Normandy coast, the town between the
cliffs, which Boisros, in the year '93, snatched for the Great King
by a feat of audacity unparalleled in war. This only by the way,
however; and that a worthy deed may not die. For at the date of this
fair of which we write, the last day of October, 1637, stout Captain
Boisros, whom Sully made for his daring Lieutenant-General of the
Ordnance, had long ceased to ruffle it; the Great King had lain in his
grave a score of years or more; and though Sully, duke and peer and
marshal, still lived, an aged, formal man, in his chteau of Villebon
by Chartres, all France, crouching under the iron hand of the
Cardinal, looked other ways.

The great snarled, biting at the hem of the red soutane. But that the
mean and Jacques Bonhomme, the merchant and the trader, flourished
under his rule, Fcamp was as good evidence this day as man could
desire. Even old burghers who remembered Charles the Ninth, and the
first glass windows ever seen in Fcamp outside the Abbey, could not
say when the price of horses had been higher or the town more full.
All day, and almost all night, the clatter of hoofs and babble of
bargains filled the narrow streets; while hucksters' cries and
drunkards' oaths, with all raucous sounds, went up to heaven like the
smoke from a furnace. The _Chariot d'Or_ and the _Holy Fig_, haunts of
those who came to buy, fairly hummed with guests, with nobles of the
province and gay sparks from Rouen, army contractors from the Rhine,
and dealers from the south. As for the _Dame Belle_ and the _Green
Man_, houses that lower down the street had food and forage for those
who came to sell, they strewed their yards a foot deep with straw, and
saying to all alike, "Voil, monsieur!" charged the full price of a
bed.

Beyond the streets it was the same. Strings of horses and ponies, with
an army of grooms and chaunters, touts and cutpurses, camped on every
piece of level ground, while the steeper slopes and hill-sides swarmed
with troupes more picturesque, if less useful. For these were the
pitches of the stilt-walkers and funambulists, the morris dancers and
hobby-horses: in a word, of an innumerable company of quacks,
jugglers, poor students, and pasteboard giants, come together for the
delectation of the gaping Normans, and all under the sway and
authority of the Chevalier du Guet, in whose honour two gibbets, each
bearing a creaking corpse, rose on convenient situations overlooking
the fair. For brawlers and minor sinners a pillory and a whipping-post
stood handy by the landward gate, and from time to time, when a lusty
vagrant or a handsome wench was dragged up for punishment, outvied in
attraction all the professional shows.

Of these, one that seemed as successful as any in catching and
chaining the fancy of the shifting crowd consisted of three persons--a
man, a boy, and an ape--who had chosen for their pitch a portion of
the steep hill-side overhanging the road. High up in this they had
driven home an iron peg, and stretching a cord from this to the top of
a tree which stood on the farther edge of the highway, had improvised
a tight-rope at once simple and effective. All day, as the changing
throng passed to and fro below, the monkey and the boy might be seen
twisting and turning and posturing on this giddy eminence, while the
man, fantastically dressed in an iron cap a world too big for him, and
a back- and breast-piece which ill-matched his stained crimson jacket
and taffety breeches, stood beating a drum at the foot of the tree, or
now and again stepped forward to receive in a ladle the sous and eggs
and comfits that rewarded the show.

He was a lean, middle-sized man, with squinting eyes and a crafty
mouth. Unaided he might have made his living by cutting purses. But he
had the wit to do by others what he could not do himself, and the luck
to have that in his company which pleased all comers; for while the
clowns gazed saucer-eyed at the uncouth form and hideous grimaces of
the ape, the thin cheeks and panting lips of the boy touched the
hearts of their mistresses, and drew from them many a cake and
fairing. Still, with a crowd change is everything; and in the contest
of attractions, where there was here a flying dragon and there a
dancing bear, and in a place apart the mystery of Joseph of Arimatha
and the Sacred Fig-tree was being performed by a company that had
played before the King in Paris--and when, besides all these raree
shows, a score of quacks and wizards and collar-grinners with lungs of
brass, were advertising themselves amid indescribable clanging of
drums and squeaking of trumpets, it was not to be expected that a boy
and a monkey could always hold the first place. An hour before sunset
the ladle began to come home empty. The crowd grew thin. Gargantuan
roars of laughter from the players' booth drew off some who lingered.
It seemed as if the trio's run of success was at an end; and that, for
all the profit they were still likely to make, they might pack up and
be off to bed.

But Master Crafty Eyes knew better. Before his popularity quite
flickered out he produced a folding stool. Setting it at the foot of
the tree with a grand air, which of itself was enough to arrest the
waverers, he solemnly covered it with a red cloth. This done, he
folded his arms, looked very sternly two ways at once, and raising his
hand without glancing upwards, cried, "Tenez! His Excellency the
Seigneur de Bault will have the kindness to descend."

The little handful of gapers laughed, and the laugh added to their
number. But the boy, to whom the words were addressed, did not move.
He sat idly on the rope, swaying to and fro, and looked out straight
before him, with a set face, and a mutinous glare in his eyes. He
appeared to be about twelve years old. He was lithe-limbed, and burned
brown by the sun, with a mass of black hair and, strange to say, blue
eyes. The ape sat cheek by jowl with him; and even at the sound of the
master's voice turned to him humanly, as if to say, "You had better
go."

Still he did not move. "Tenez!" Master Crafty Eyes cried again, and
more sharply. "His Excellency the Seigneur de Bault will have the
kindness to descend, and narrate his history. _coutez! coutez!
mesdames et messieurs!_ It will repay you."

This time the boy, frowning and stubborn, looked down from his perch.
He seemed to be measuring the distance, and calculating whether his
height from the ground would save him from the whip. Apparently he
came to the conclusion it would not, for on the man crying "_Vitement!
Vitement!_" and flinging a grim look upwards, he began to descend
slowly, a sullen reluctance manifest in all his movements.

On reaching the ground, he made his way through the audience--which
had increased to above a score--and climbed heavily on the stool,
where he stood looking round him with a dark shamefacedness,
surprising in one who was part of a show, and had been posturing all
day long for the public amusement. The women, quick to espy the
hollows in his cheeks, and the great wheal that seamed his neck, and
quick also to admire the straightness of his limbs and the light pose
of his head, regarded him pitifully. The men only stared; smoking had
not yet come in at Fcamp, so they munched cakes and gazed by turns.

"Oyez! Oyez! Oyez!" cried the man with the drum. "Listen to the
remarkable, lamentable, and veritable history of the Seigneur de
Bault, now before you! Oyez!"

The boy cast a look round, but there was no escape. So, sullenly, and
in a sing-song tone--through which, nevertheless, some note of
dignity, some strange echo of power and authority, that gave the
recital its bizarre charm and made it what it was, would continually
force itself--he began with the words at the head of this chapter:--

"I am Jehan de Bault, Seigneur of--I know not where, and Lord of
seventeen lordships in the County of--I forget the name, of a most
noble and puissant family, possessing the High Justice, the Middle,
and the Low. In my veins runs the blood of Roland, and of my
forefathers were three marshals of France. I stand here, the last of
my race; in token whereof may God preserve my mother, the King,
France, and this Province! I was stolen by gypsies at the age of five,
and carried off and sold by my father's steward, as Joseph was by his
brethren, and I appeal to--I appeal to--all good subjects of France
to--help me to----"

"My rights!" interjected Crafty Eyes, with a savage glance.

"My rights," the boy whispered, lowering his head.

The drum-man came forward briskly. "Just so, ladies and gentlemen," he
cried with wonderful glibness. "And seldom as it is that you have
before you the representative of one of our most noble and ancient
families a-begging your help, seldom as that remarkable, lamentable,
and veritable sight is to be seen in Fcamp, sure I am that you will
respond willingly, generously, and to the point, my lord, ladies and
gentlemen!" And with this, and a far grander air than when it had been
merely an affair of a boy and an ape, the knave carried round his
ladle, doffing his cap to each who contributed, and saying politely,
"The Sieur de Bault thanks you, sir. The Sieur de Bault is your
servant, madam."

There was something so novel in the whole business, something so odd
and inexplicably touching in the boy's words and manner, that with all
the appearance of a barefaced trick, appealing only to the most
ignorant, the thing wrought on the crowd: as doubtless it had wrought
on a hundred crowds before. The first man to whom the ladle came
grinned sheepishly and gave against his will; and his fellows
throughout maintained a position of reserve, shrugging their shoulders
and looking wisdom. But a dozen women became believers at once, and
despite the blare and flare of rival dragons and Moriscoes and the
surrounding din and hubbub, the ladle came back full of deniers and
sous.

The showman was counting his gains into his pouch, when a silver franc
spun through the air and fell at his feet, and at the same time a
harsh voice cried, "Here, you, sirrah! A word with you."

Master Crafty Eyes looked up, and doffing his cap humbly--for the
voice was a voice of authority--went cringing to the speaker. This was
an elderly man, well mounted, who had reined up his horse on the
skirts of the crowd as the boy began his harangue. He had a plain
soldier's face, with grey moustachios and a small, pointed grey beard,
and he seemed to be a person of rank on his way out of the town; for
he had two or three armed servants behind him, of whom one carried a
valise on his crupper.

"What is your will, noble sir?" the showman whined, standing
bare-headed at his stirrup and looking up at him.

"Who taught the lad that rubbish?" the horseman asked sternly.

"No one, my lord. It is the truth."

"Then bring him here, liar!" was the answer.

The showman obeyed, not very willingly, dragging the boy off the
stool, and jerking him through the crowd. The stranger looked down at
the child for a moment in silence. Then he said sharply, "Hark ye,
tell me the truth, boy. What is your name?"

The lad stood straight up, and answered without hesitation, "Jehan de
Bault."

"Of nowhere in the County of No Name," the stranger gibed gravely. "Of
a noble and puissant family--and the rest. All that is true, I
suppose?"

A flicker as of hope gleamed in the boy's eyes. His cheek reddened. He
raised his hand to the horse's shoulder, and answered in a voice which
trembled a little, "It is true."


[Illustration: "THE SHOWMAN WAS COUNTING HIS GAINS INTO HIS POUCH"
(_p_. 11).]


"Where is Bault?" the stranger asked grimly.

The lad looked puzzled and disappointed. His lip trembled, his colour
lied again. He glanced here and there, and finally shook his head. "I
do not know," he said faintly.

"Nor do I," the horseman replied, striking his long brown boot with
his riding-switch to give emphasis to the words, and looking sternly
round. "Nor do I. And what is more, you may take it from me that there
is no family of that name in France! And once more you may take this
from me too. I am the Vicomte de Bresly, and I have a government in
Guienne. Play this game in my county, and I will have you both whipped
for common cheats, and you, Master Drummer, branded as well! Bear it
in mind, sirrah; and when you perform, give Perigord a wide berth.
That is all."

He struck his horse at the last word, and rode off; sitting, like an
old soldier, so straight in his saddle that he did not see what
happened behind him, or that the boy sprang forward with a hasty cry,
and would, but for the showman's grasp, have followed him. He rode
away, unheeding and without looking back; and the boy, after a brief
passionate struggle with his master, collapsed.

"You limb!" the man with the drum cried, as he shook him. "What bee
has stung you? You won't be quiet, eh? Then take that! and that!" and
he struck the child brutally in the face--twice.

Some cried shame and some laughed. But it was nobody's business, and
there were a hundred delights within sight. What was one little boy,
or a blow more or less, amid the whirl and tumult of the fair? A score
of yards away a dancing girl, a very Peri--or so she seemed by the
light of four tallow candles--was pirouetting on a rickety platform.
Almost rubbing elbows with her was a philosopher, who had conquered
all the secrets of Nature except cleanliness, and was prepared to sell
infallible love-philtres and the potion of perpetual youth--for four
farthings! And beyond these stretched a vista of wonders and
prodigies, all vocal, not to say deafening. So one by one, with a
shrug or a sneer, the onlookers melted away, until only our trio
remained: Master Crafty Eyes counting his gains, the boy sobbing
against the bank on which he had thrown himself, and the monkey
gibbering and chattering overhead--a dark shapeless object on an
invisible rope. For night was falling: where the fun of the fair was
not were gloom and a rising wind, lurking cutpurses, and waste land.

The showman seemed to feel this, for having counted his takings, he
kicked up the boy and began to pack up. He had nearly finished, and
was stooping over the coil of rope, securing the end, when a touch on
his shoulder caused him to jump a yard. A tall man wrapped in a cloak,
who had come up unseen, stood at his elbow.

"Well!" the showman cried, striving to hide his alarm under an
appearance of bluster. "And what may you want?"

"A word with you," the unknown answered.

The voice was so cold and passionless it gave Crafty Eyes a turn.
"Diable!" he muttered, striving to pierce the darkness and see what
the other was like. But he could not; so as to shake off the
impression, he asked, with a sneer, "You are not a vicomte, are you?"

"No," the stranger replied gravely, "I am not."

"Nor the governor of a county?"

"No."

"Then you may speak!" rejoined the showman grandly.

"Not here," the cloaked man answered. "I must see you alone."

"Then you will have to come home with me, and wait until I have put up
the boy," the other said. "I am not going to lose him for you or
anyone. And for a penny he'd be off! Does it suit you? You may take it
or leave it."

The unknown, whose features were completely masked by the dusk, nodded
assent, and without more ado the four turned their faces towards the
streets; the boy carrying the monkey, and the two men following close
on his heels. Whenever they passed before a lighted booth the showman
strove to learn something of his companion's appearance but the latter
wore his cloak so high about his face, and was so well served by a
wide-flapped hat which almost met it, that curiosity was completely
baffled; and they reached the low inn where the showman rented a
corner of the stable without that cunning gentleman being a jot the
wiser for his pains.

It was a vile, evil-smelling place they entered, divided into six or
eight stalls by wooden partitions reaching half-way to the tiles. A
horn lantern hung at each end filled it with yellow lights and deep
shadows. A pony raised its head and whinnied as the men entered, but
most of the stalls were empty, or tenanted only by drunken clowns
sleeping in the straw.

"You cannot lock him in here," said the stranger, looking round him.

The showman grunted. "Cannot I?" he said. "There are tricks in all
trades, master. I reckon I can--with this!" And producing from
somewhere about him a thin steel chain, he held it before the other's
face. "That is my lock and door," he said triumphantly.

"It won't hold him long," the other answered impassively. "The fifth
link from the end is worn through now."

"You have sharp eyes!" the showman exclaimed, with reluctant
admiration. "But it will hold a bit yet. I fasten him in yonder
corner. Do you wait here, and I will come back to you."

He was not long about it. When he returned he led the stranger into
the farthest of the stalls, which, as well as that next to it, was
empty. "We can talk here," he said bluntly. "At any rate, I have no
better place. The house is full. Now, what is it?"

"I want that boy," the tall man answered. The showman laughed--stopped
laughing--laughed again. "I dare say you do," he said derisively.
"There is not a better or a pluckier boy on the rope out of Paris. And
for patter? There is nothing on the road like the bit he did this
afternoon, nor a bit that pays as well."

"Who taught it him?" the stranger asked.

"I did."

"That is a lie," the other answered in a perfectly unmoved tone. "If
you like I will tell you what you did. You taught him the latter half
of the story. The other he knew before: down to the word 'province.'"

The showman gasped. "Diable!" he muttered. "Who told you?"

"Never mind. You bought the boy. From whom?"

"From some gypsies at the great fair of Beaucaire," the showman
answered sullenly.

"Who is he?"

Crafty Eyes laughed dryly. "If I knew I should not be padding the
hoof," he said. "Or, again, he may be nobody, and the tale patter. You
have heard as much as I have. What do you think?"

"I think I shall find out when I have bought the boy," the stranger
answered coolly. "What will you take for him?"

The showman gasped again. "You come to the point," he said.

"It is my custom. What is his price?"

The showman's imagination had never soared beyond nor his ears ever
heard of a larger sum than a thousand crowns. He mentioned it
trembling. There might be such a sum in the world.

"A thousand livres, if you like. Not a sou more," was the answer.

The nearer lantern threw a strong light on Crafty Eyes' face; but that
was mere shadow beside the light of cupidity which sparkled in his
eyes. He could get another boy; scores of boys. But a thousand livres!
A thousand livres! "Tournois!" he said faintly. "Livres Tournois!" In
his wildest moments of avarice he had never dreamed of possessing such
a sum.

"No, Paris livres," the stranger answered coldly. "Paid to-morrow at
the _Golden Chariot_. If you agree, you will deliver the boy to me
there at noon, and receive the money."

The showman nodded, vanquished by the mere sound of the sum. Paris
livres let it be. Danae did not more quickly succumb to the golden
shower.




                             CHAPTER II.

                          SOLOMON NTREDAME.


A little later that night, at the hour which saw the showman pay his
second visit to the street before the _Chariot d'Or_, there to stand
gaping at the lighted windows, and peering into the courtyard in a
kind of fascination--or perhaps to assure himself that the house would
not fly away, and his golden hopes with it--the twelve-year-old boy,
the basis of those hopes, awoke and stirred restlessly in the straw.
He was cold, and the chain galled him. His face ached where the man
had struck him. In the next stall two drunken men were fighting, and
the place reeked with oaths and foulness. But none of these things
were so novel as to keep the boy awake; and sighing and drawing the
monkey nearer to him, he would in a moment have been asleep again if
the moon, shining with great brightness through the little square
aperture above him, had not thrown its light directly on his head, and
roused him more completely.

He sat up and gazed at it, and God knows what softening thoughts and
pitiful recollections the beauty of the night brought into his mind;
but presently he began to weep--not as a child cries, with noise and
wailing, but in silence, as a man weeps. The monkey awoke and crept
into his breast, but he hardly regarded it. The misery, the
hopelessness, the slavery of his life, ignored from hour to hour, or
borne at other times with a boy's nonchalance, filled his heart to
bursting now. Crouching in his lair in the straw, he shook with agony.
The tears welled up, and would not be restrained, until they hid the
face of the sky and darkened even the moon's pure light.

Or was it his tears? He dashed them away and looked, and rose slowly
to his feet; while the ape, clinging to his breast, began to mow and
gibber. A black mass, which gradually resolved itself, as the boy's
eyes cleared, into a man's hat and head, filled the aperture.

"Hush!" came from the head in a cautious whisper. "Come nearer. I will
not hurt you. Do you wish to escape, lad?"

The boy clasped his hands in an ecstasy. "Yes, oh yes!" he murmured.
The question chimed in so naturally with his thoughts, it scarcely
surprised him.

"If you were loose, could you get through this window?" the man asked.
He spoke cautiously, under his breath; but the noise in the next
stall, to say nothing of a vile drinking song which was being chanted
forth at the farther end of the stable, was such he might safely have
shouted. "Yes? Then take this file. Rub at the fifth link from the
end: the one that is nearly through. Do you understand, boy?"

"Yes, yes," Jehan cried again, groping in the straw for the tool,
which had fallen at his feet. "I know."

"When you are loose, cover up the chain," continued the other in a
slow biting tone. "Or lie on that part of it, and wait until morning.
As soon as you see the first gleam of light, climb out through the
window. You will find me outside."

The boy would have uttered his trembling thanks. But lo! in a moment
the aperture was clear again; the moon sailed unchanged through an
unchanged sky; and all was as before. Save for the presence of the
little bit of rough steel in his hand, he might have thought it a
dream. But the file was there; it was there, and with a choking sob of
hope and fear and excitement, he fell to work on the chain.

It was clumsy work he made of it in the dark. But the link was so much
worn, a man might have wrenched it open, and the boy did not spare his
fingers. The dispute next door covered the song of the file; and the
smoky horn lantern which alone lighted that end of the stable had no
effect in the dark corner where he lay. True, he had to work by feel,
looking out all the while for his tyrant's coming; but the tool was
good, and the fingers, hardened by many an hour of work on the rope,
were strong and lithe. When the showman at last stumbled to his place
in the straw, the boy lay free--free and trembling.

All was not done, however. It seemed an hour before the man settled
himself--an hour of agony and suspense to Jehan, feigning sleep; since
at any moment his master might take it into his head to look into
things. But Crafty Eyes had no suspicion. Having kicked the boy and
heard the chain rattle, and so assured himself that he was there--so
much caution he exercised every night, drunk or sober--he was
satisfied; and by-and-by, when his imagination, heated by thoughts of
wealth, permitted it, he fell asleep, and dreamed that he had married
the Cardinal's cook-maid and ate collops on Sundays.

Even so, the night seemed endless to the boy, lying wakeful, with his
eyes on the sky. Now he was hot, now cold. One moment the thought that
the window might prove too strait for him threw him into a bath of
perspiration; the next he shuddered at the possibility of re-capture,
and saw himself dragged back and flayed by his brutal owner. But a
watched pot _does_ boil, though slowly. The first streak of dawn came
at last--as it does when the sky is darkest; and with it, even as the
boy rose warily to his feet, the sound of a faint whistle outside the
window.

A common mortal could no more have passed through that window without
noise than an old man can make himself young again. But the boy did
it. As he dropped to the ground outside he heard the whistle again.
The air was still dark; but a score of paces away, beyond a low wall,
he made out the form of a horseman, and went towards it.

It was the man in the cloak, who stooped and held out his hand. "Jump
up behind me," he muttered.

The boy went to obey, but as he clasped the outstretched hand, it was
suddenly withdrawn. "What is that? What have you got there?" the rider
exclaimed, peering down at him.

"It is only Taras, the monkey," Jehan said timidly.

"Throw it away," the stranger answered. "Do you hear me?" he continued
in a stern, composed tone. "Throw it away, I say."

The boy stood hesitating a moment; then, without a word, he turned and
fled into the darkness the way he had come. The man on the horse swore
under his breath, but he had no remedy; and before he could tell what
to expect, the boy was at his side again. "I've put it through the
window," Jehan explained breathlessly. "If I had left it here, the
dogs and the boys would have killed it."

The man made no comment aloud, but jerked him roughly to the crupper;
and bidding him hold fast, started the horse, which, setting off at an
easy amble, quickly bore them out of Fcamp. As they passed through
the fair-ground of yesterday--a shadowy, ghastly waste at this hour,
peopled by wandering asses, and packhorses, and a few lurking figures
that leapt up out of the darkness, and ran after them whining for
alms--the boy shivered and clung close to his protector. But he had no
more than recognised the scene before they were out of sight of it,
and riding through the open fields. The grey dawn was spreading, the
cocks at distant farms were crowing. The dim, misty countryside, the
looming trees, the raw air, the chill that crept into his ill-covered
bones--all these, which might have seemed to others wretched
conditions enough, filled the boy with hope and gladness. For they
meant freedom.

But presently, as they rode on, his thoughts took a fresh turn. They
began to busy themselves, and fearfully, with the man before him,
whose continued silence and cold reserve set a hundred wild ideas
humming in his brain. What manner of man was he? Who was he? Why had
he helped him? Jehan had heard of ogres and giants that decoyed
children into forests and devoured them. He had listened to ballads of
such adventures, sung at fairs and in the streets, a hundred times;
now they came so strongly into his mind, and so grew upon him in this
grim companionship, that by-and-by, seeing a wood before them through
which the road ran, he shook with terror and gave himself up for lost.
Sure enough, when they came to the wood, and had ridden a little way
into it, the man, whose face he had never seen, stopped. "Get down,"
he said sternly.


[Illustration: "JEHAN WENT TREMBLING AND FOUND THE HOLE" (_p_. 33).]


Jehan obeyed, his teeth chattering, his legs quaking under him. He
expected the man to produce a large carving-knife, or call some of his
fellows out of the forest to share his repast. Instead, the stranger
made a queer pass with his hands over his horse's neck, and bade the
boy go to an old stump which stood by the way. "There is a hole in the
farther side of it," he said. "Look in the hole."

Jehan went trembling and found the hole, and looked. "What do you
see?" the rider asked.

"A piece of money," said Jehan.

"Bring it to me," the stranger answered gravely.

The boy took it--it was only a copper sou--and did as he was bidden.
"Get up!" said the horseman curtly. Jehan obeyed, and they went on as
before.

When they had ridden half-way through the forest, however, the
stranger stopped again. "Get down," he said.

The boy obeyed, and was directed as on the former occasion--but not
until the horseman had made the same strange gesture with his
hands--to go to an old stump. This time he found a silver livre. He
gave it to his master, and climbed again to his place, marvelling
much.

A third time they stopped, on the farther verge of the forest. The
same words passed, but this time the boy found a gold crown in the
hole.

After that his mind no longer ran upon ogres and giants. Instead,
another fancy almost as dreadful took possession of him. He remarked
that everything the stranger wore was black: his cloak, his hat, his
gauntlets. Even his long boots, which in those days were commonly made
of untanned leather, were black. So was the furniture of the horse.
Jehan noticed this as he mounted the third time; and connecting it
with the marvellous springing up of money where the man willed, began
to be seized with panic, never doubting but that he had fallen into
the hands of the devil. Likely enough, he would have dropped off at
the first opportunity that offered, and fled for his life--or his
soul, but he did not know much of that--if the stranger had not in the
nick of time drawn a parcel of food from his saddle-bag. He gave some
to Jehan. Even so, the boy, hungry as he was, did not dare to touch it
until he was assured that his companion was really eating--eating, and
not pretending. Then, with a great sigh of relief, he began to eat
too. For he knew that the devil never ate!

After this they rode on in silence, until, about an hour before noon,
they came to a small farm-steading standing by the road, half a league
short of the sleepy old town of Yvetot, which Beranger was one day to
celebrate. Here the magician--for such Jehan now took his companion to
be--stopped. "Get down," he said.

The boy obeyed, and instinctively looked for a stump. But there was no
stump, and this time his master, after scanning his ragged garments as
if to assure himself of his appearance, had a different order to give.
"Go to that farm," he said. "Knock at the door, and say that Solomon
Ntredame de Paris requires two fowls. They will give them to you.
Bring them to me."

The boy went wide-eyed, knocked, and gave his message. A woman, who
opened the door, stretched out her hand, took up a couple of fowls
that lay tied together on the hearth, and gave them to him without a
word. He took them--he no longer wondered at anything--and carried
them back to his master in the road.

"Now listen to me," said the latter, in his slow, cold tone. "Go into
the town you see before you, and in the market-place you will find an
inn with the sign of the _Three Pigeons_. Enter the yard and offer
these fowls for sale, but ask a livre apiece for them, that they may
not be bought. While offering them, make an excuse to go into the
stable, where you will see a grey horse. Drop this white lump into the
horse's manger when no one is looking, and afterwards remain at the
door of the yard. If you see me, do not speak to me. Do you
understand?"

Jehan said he did; but his new master made him repeat his orders from
beginning to end before he let him go with the fowls and the white
lump, which was about the size of a walnut, and looked like rock-salt.

About an hour later the landlord of the _Three Pigeons_ at Yvetot
heard a horseman stop at his door. He went out to meet him. Now,
Yvetot is on the road to Havre and Harfleur; and though the former of
these places was then in the making and the latter was dying fast, the
landlord had had experience of many guests. But so strange a guest as
the one he found awaiting him he thought he had never seen. In the
first place, the gentleman was clad from top to toe in black; and
though he had no servants behind him, he wore an air of as grave
consequence as though he boasted six. In the next place, his face was
so long, thin, and cadaverous that, but for a great black line of
eyebrows that cut it in two and gave it a very curious and sinister
expression, people meeting him for the first time might have been
tempted to laugh. Altogether, the landlord could not make him out; but
he thought it safer to go out and hold his stirrup, and ask his
pleasure.

"I shall dine here," the stranger answered gravely. As he dismounted
his cloak fell open. The landlord observed with growing wonder that
its black lining was sprinkled with cabalistic figures embroidered in
white.

Introduced to the public room, which was over the great stone porch
and happened to be empty, the traveller lost none of his singularity.
He paused a little way within the door, and stood as if suddenly
fallen into deep thought. The landlord, beginning to think him mad,
ventured to recall him by asking what his honour would take.

"There is something amiss in this house," the stranger replied
abruptly, turning his eyes on him.

"Amiss?" the host answered, faltering under his gaze, and wishing
himself well out of the room. "Not that I am aware of, your honour."

"There is no one ill?"

"No, your honour, certainly not."

"Nor deformed?"

"No."

"You are mistaken," the stranger answered firmly. "Know that I am
Solomon, son to Csar, son to Michel Ntredame of Paris, commonly
called by the learned Nostradamus and the Transcendental, who read the
future and rode the Great White Horse of Death. All things hidden are
open to me."

The landlord only gaped, but his wife and a serving wench, who had
come to the door out of curiosity, and were listening and staring with
all their might, crossed themselves industriously. "I am here," the
stranger continued, after a brief pause, "to construct the horoscope
of His Eminence the Cardinal, of whom it has been predicted that he
will die at Yvetot. But I find the conditions unpropitious. There is
an adverse influence in this house."

The landlord scratched his head, and looked helplessly at his wife.
But she was quite taken up with awe of the stranger, whose head nearly
touched the ceiling of the low room; while his long, pale face seemed
in the obscurity--for the day was dark--to be of an unearthly pallor.

"An adverse influence," the astrologer continued gravely. "What is
more, I now see where it is. It is in the stable. You have a grey
horse."

The landlord, somewhat astonished, said he had.

"You had. You have not now. The devil has it!" was the astounding
answer.

"My grey horse?"

The stranger inclined his head.

"Nay, there you are wrong!" the host retorted briskly. "I'm hanged if
he has! For I rode the horse this morning, and it went as well and
quietly as ever in its life."

"Send and see," the tall man answered.

The serving girl, obeying a nod, went off reluctantly to the stable,
while her master, casting a look of misliking at his guest, walked
uneasily to the window. In a moment the girl came back, her face
white. "The grey is in a fit," she cried, keeping the whole width of
the room between her and the stranger. "It is sweating and
staggering."

The landlord, with an oath, ran off to see, and in a minute the
appearance of an excited group in the square under the window showed
that the thing was known. The traveller took no notice of this,
however, nor of the curious and reverential glances which the
womenfolk, huddled about the door of the room, cast at him. He walked
up and down the room with his eyes lowered.

The landlord came back presently, his face black as thunder. "It has
got the staggers," he said resentfully.

"It has got the devil," the stranger answered coldly. "I knew it was
in the house when I entered. If you doubt me, I will prove it."

"Ay?" said the landlord stubbornly.

The man in black went to his saddle-bag, which had been brought up and
laid in a corner, and took out a shallow glass bowl, curiously
embossed with a cross and some mystic symbols. "Go to the church
there," he said, "and fill this with holy water."

The host took it unwillingly, and went on his strange errand. While he
was away the astrologer opened the window, and looked out idly. When
he saw the other returning, he gave the order "Lead out the horse."

There was a brief delay, but presently two stablemen, with a little
posse of wondering attendants, partly urged and partly led out a
handsome grey horse. The poor animal trembled and hung its head, but
with some difficulty was brought under the window. Now and again a
sharp spasm convulsed its limbs, and scattered the spectators right
and left.

Solomon Ntredame leaned out of the window. In his left hand he held
the bowl, in his right a small brush. "If this beast is sick with any
earthly sickness," he cried in a deep solemn voice, audible across the
square, "or with such as earthly skill can cure, then let this holy
water do it no harm, but refresh it. But if it be possessed by the
devil, and given up to the powers of darkness and to the enemy of man
for ever and ever to do his will and pleasure, then let these drops
burn and consume it as with fire. Amen! Amen!"

With the last word he sprinkled the horse. The effect was magical. The
animal reared up, as if it had been furiously spurred, and plunged so
violently that the men who held it were dragged this way and that. The
crowd fled every way; but not so quickly but that a hundred eyes had
seen the horse smoke where the water fell on it. Moreover, when they
cautiously approached it, the hair in two or three places was found to
be burned off!

The magician turned gravely from the window. "I wish to eat," he said.

None of the servants, however, would come into the room or serve him,
and the landlord, trembling, set the board with his own hands and
waited on him. Mine host had begun by doubting and suspecting, but,
simple man! his scepticism was not proof against the holy water trial
and his wife's terror. By-and-by, with a sidelong glance at his guest,
he faltered the question: What should he do with the horse?

The man in black looked solemn. "Whoever mounts it will die within the
year," he said.

"I will shoot it," the landlord replied, shuddering.

"The devil will pass into one of the other horses," was the answer.

"Then," said the miserable innkeeper, "perhaps your honour would
accept it?"

"God forbid!" the astrologer answered. And that frightened the other
more than all the rest. "But if you can find at any time," the wizard
continued, "a beggar-boy with black hair and blue eyes, who does not
know his father's name, he may take the horse and break the spell. So
I read the signs."

The landlord cried out that such a person was not to be met with in a
lifetime. But before he had well finished his sentence a shrill voice
called through the keyhole that there was such a boy in the yard at
that moment, offering poultry for sale.

"In God's name, then, give him the horse!" the stranger said. "Bid him
take it to Rouen, and at every running water he comes to say a
paternoster and sprinkle its tail. So he may escape, and you, too. I
know no other way."

The trembling innkeeper said he would do that, and did it. And so,
when the man in black rode into Rouen the next evening, he did not
ride alone. He was attended at a respectful distance by a good-looking
page clad in sable velvet, and mounted on a handsome grey horse.




                             CHAPTER III.

                            MAN AND WIFE.


It is a pleasant thing to be warmly clad and to lie softly, and at
night to be in shelter and in the day to eat and drink. But all these
things may be dearly bought, and so the boy Jehan de Bault soon found.
He was no longer beaten, chained, or starved; he lay in a truckle bed
instead of a stable; the work he had to do was of the lightest. But
he paid for all in fears--in an ever-present, abiding, mastering fear
of the man behind whom he rode: who never scolded, never rated, nor
even struck him, but whose lightest word--and much more, his long
silences--filled the lad with dread and awe unspeakable. Something
sinister in the man's face, all found; but to Jehan, who never doubted
his dark powers, and who shrank from his eye, and flinched at his
voice, and cowered when he spoke, there was a cold malevolence in the
face, an evil knowledge, that made the boy's flesh creep and chained
his soul with dread.

The astrologer saw this, and revelled in it, and went about to
increase it after a fashion of his own. Hearing the boy, on an
occasion when he had turned to him suddenly, ejaculate "_Oh, Dieu!_"
he said, with a dreadful smile, "You should not say that! Do you know
why?"

The boy's face grew a shade paler, but he did not speak.

"Ask me why! Say, 'Why not?'"

"Why not?" Jehan muttered. He would have given the world to avert his
eyes, but he could not.

"Because you have sold yourself to the devil!" the other hissed.
"Others may say it; you may not. What is the use? You have sold
yourself--body, soul, and spirit. You came of your own accord, and
climbed on the black horse. And now," he continued, in a tone which
always compelled obedience, "answer my questions. What is your name?"

"Jehan de Bault," the boy whispered, shivering and shuddering.

"Louder!"

"Jehan de Bault."

"Repeat the story you told at the fair."

"I am Jehan de Bault, Seigneur of--I know not where, and Lord of
seventeen lordships in the County of Perigord, of a most noble and
puissant family, possessing the High Justice, the Middle, and the Low.
In my veins runs the blood of Roland, and of my forefathers were three
marshals of France. I stand here, the last of my race; in token
whereof may God preserve my mother, the King, France, and this
Province."

"Ha! In the County of Perigord!" the astrologer said, with a sudden
lightening of his heavy brows. "You have remembered that?"

"Yes. I heard the word at Fcamp."

"And all that is true?"

"Yes."

"Who taught it you?"

"I do not know." The boy's face, in its straining, was painful to see.

"What is the first thing you can remember?"

"A house in a wood."

"Can you remember your father?"

"No."

"Your mother?"

"No--yes--I am not sure."

"Umph! Were you stolen by gypsies?"

"I do not know."

"Or sold by your father's steward?"

"I do not know."

"How long were you with the man from whom I took you?"

"I do not know."

"I do," the astrologer answered, in the same even tone in which he had
put the questions. And the boy never doubted him. "Beware, therefore,"
the man in black continued, with a dreadful sidelong glance, "how you
seek to deceive me! You can fall back now. I have done with you for
the present."

I say "the boy never doubted him." This was not wonderful in an age of
spells and _diablerie_, when the wisest allowed the reality of magic,
and the learned and curious could cite a hundred instances of its
power. That La Brosse warned Henry the Great he would die in his
coach, and that Thomassin read in the stars the very day, hour, and
minute of the catastrophe, no man of that time questioned. That Michel
Ntredame promised a crown to each of Catherine de Medici's three
sons, and that Sully's preceptor foretold in detail that Minister's
career, were held to be facts as certain as that La Rivire cast the
horoscope of the thirteenth Louis while the future monarch lay in his
cradle. The men of the day believed that the Concini swayed her
mistress by magic; that Wallenstein, the greatest soldier of his time,
did nothing without his familiar; that Richelieu, the greatest
statesman, had Joseph always at his elbow. In such an age it was not
wonderful that a child should accept without question the claims of
this man: who was accustomed to inspire fear in the many, and in the
few that vague and subtle repulsion which we are wont to associate
with the presence of evil.

Beyond Rouen, and between that city and Paris, the two companions
found the road well frequented. Of the passers, many stood to gaze at
the traveller in black, and some drew to the farther side of the road
as he went by. But none laughed or found anything ridiculous in his
appearance; or if they did, it needed but a glance from his long, pale
face to restore them to sobriety. At the inn at Rouen he was well
received; at the _Grand Cerf_ at Les Andelys, where he seemed to be
known, he was welcomed with effusion. Though the house was full, a
separate chamber was assigned to him, and supper prepared for him with
the utmost speed.

Here, however, he was not destined to enjoy his privacy long. At the
last moment, as he was sitting down to his meal, with the boy in
attendance, a bustle was heard outside. The voice of someone rating
the landlord in no measured terms became audible, the noise growing
louder as the speaker mounted the stairs. Presently a hand was laid on
the latch, the door was thrown open, and a gentleman strode into the
room whose swaggering air and angry gestures showed that he was
determined to make good his footing. A lady, masked, and in a
travelling habit, followed more quietly; and in the background could
be seen three or four servants, together with the unfortunate
landlord, who was very evidently divided between fear of his
mysterious guest and the claims of the newcomers.

The astrologer rose slowly from his seat. His peculiar aspect, his
stature and leanness and black garb, which never failed to impress
strangers, took the intruder somewhat aback. He hesitated, and
removing his hat, began to utter a tardy apology. "I crave your
pardon, sir," he said ungraciously, "but we ride on after supper. We
stay here only to eat, and they tell us there is no other chamber with
even a degree of emptiness in it."

"You are welcome, M. de Vidoche," the man in black answered.

The intruder started and frowned. "You know my name," he said, with a
sneer. "But there, I suppose it is your business to know these
things."

"It is my business to know," the astrologer answered, unmoved. "Will
not madame be seated?"


[Illustration: "THE ASTROLOGER ROSE SLOWLY FROM HIS SEAT" (_p_. 52).]


The lady bowed, and taking off her mask with fingers which trembled a
little, disclosed a fair, childish face, that would, have been pretty,
and even charming, but for an expression of nervousness which seemed
habitual to it. She shrank from the astrologer's gaze, and, sitting
down as far from him as the table permitted, pretended to busy herself
in taking off her gloves. He was accustomed to be met in this way, and
to see the timid quake before him; but it did not escape his notice
that this lady shrank also at the sound of her husband's voice, and
when he spoke, listened with the pitiful air of propitiation which may
be seen in a whipped dog. She was pale, and by the side of her husband
seemed to lack colour. He was a man of singularly handsome exterior,
dark-haired and hard-eyed, with a high, fresh complexion, and a
sneering lip. His dress was in the extreme of the fashion, his falling
collar vandyked, and his breeches open below the knee, where they were
met by wide-mouthed boots. A great plume of feathers set off his hat,
and he carried a switch as well as a sword.

The astrologer read the story at a glance. "Madame is perhaps fatigued
by the journey," he said politely.

"Madame is very easily fatigued," the husband replied, throwing down
his hat with a savage sneer, "especially when she is doing anything
she does not like."

"You are for Paris," Ntredame answered, with apparent surprise. "I
thought all ladies liked Paris. Now, if madame were leaving Paris and
going to the country----"

"The country!" M. de Vidoche exclaimed, with an impatient oath. "She
would bury herself there if she could!" And he added something under
his breath, the point of which it was not very difficult to guess.

Madame de Vidoche forced a smile, striving, woman-like, to cover all.
"It is natural I should like Pinatel," she said timidly, her eye on
her husband. "I have lived there so much."

"Yes, madame, you are never tired of reminding me of that!" M. de
Vidoche retorted harshly. Women who are afraid of their husbands say
the right thing once in a hundred times. "You will tell this gentleman
in a moment that I was a beggar when I married you! But if I was----"

"Oh, Charles!" she murmured faintly.

"That is right! Cry now!" he exclaimed brutally. "Thank God, however,
here is supper. And after supper we go on to Vernon. The roads are
rutty, and you will have something else to do besides cry then."

The man in black, going on with his meal at the other end of the
table, listened with an impassive face. Like all his profession, he
seemed inclined to hear rather than to talk. But when supper came up
with only one plate for the two--a mistake due to the crowded state of
the inn--and M. de Vidoche fell to scolding very loudly, he seemed
unable to refrain from saying a word in the innkeeper's defence. "It
is not so very unusual for the husband to share his wife's plate," he
said coolly; "and sometimes a good deal more that is hers."

M. de Vidoche looked at him for a moment, as if he were minded to ask
him what business it was of his; but he thought better of it, and
instead said, with a scowl, "It is not so very unusual either for
astrologers to make mistakes."

"Quacks," the man in black said calmly.

"I quite agree," M. de Vidoche replied, with mock politeness. "I
accept the correction."

"Yet there is one thing to be said even then," the astrologer
continued, slowly leaning forward, and, as if by chance, moving
one of the candles so as to bring it directly between madame and
himself. "I have noticed it, M. de Vidoche. They make mistakes
sometimes in predicting marriages, and even births. But never in
predicting--deaths."

M. de Vidoche, who may have had some key in his own breast which
unlocked the full meaning of the other's words, started and looked
across at him. Whatever he read in the pale, sombre countenance which
the removal of the candle fully revealed to him, and in which the
eyes, burning vividly, seemed alone alive, he shuddered. He made no
reply. His look dropped. Even a little of his high colour left his
checks. He went on with his meal in silence. The four tall candles
still burned dully on the table. But to M. de Vidoche they seemed on a
sudden to be the candles that burn by the side of a corpse. In a flash
he saw a room hung with black, a bed, and a silent covered form on
it--a form with wan, fair hair--a woman's. And then he saw other
things.

Clearly, the astrologer was no ordinary man.

He seemed to take no notice, however, of the effect his words had
produced. Indeed, he no longer urged his attentions on M. de Vidoche.
He turned politely to madame, and made some commonplace observation on
the roads. She answered it--inattentively.

"You are looking at my boy," he continued; for Jehan was waiting
inside the door, watching with a frightened, fascinated gaze his
master's every act and movement. "I do not wonder that he attracts the
ladies' eyes."

"He is a handsome child," she answered, smiling faintly.

"Yes, he is good-looking," the man in black rejoined. "There is one
thing which men of science sell that he will never need."

"What is that?" she asked curiously, looking at the astrologer for the
first time with attention.

"A love-philtre," he answered courteously. "His looks, like madame's,
will always supply its place."

She coloured, smiling a little sadly. "Are there such things?" she
said. "Is it true?--I mean, I always thought that they were a child's
tale."

"No more than poisons and antidotes, madame," he answered earnestly,
"the preservative power of salt, or the destructive power of
gunpowder. You take the Queen's herb, you sneeze; the drug of
Paracelsus, you sleep; wine, you see double. Why is the powder of
attraction more wonderful than these? Or if you remain unconvinced,"
he continued more lightly, "look round you, madame. You see young men
loving old women, the high-born allying themselves with the vulgar,
the ugly enchanting the beautiful. You see a hundred inexplicable
matches. Believe me, it is we who make them. I speak without motive,"
he added, bowing, "for Madame de Vidoche can never have need of other
philtre than her eyes."

Madame, toying idly with a plate, her regards on the table, sighed.
"And yet they say matches are made in heaven," she murmured softly.

"It is from heaven--from the stars--we derive our knowledge," he
answered, in the same tone.

But his face!--it was well she did not see that! And before more
passed, M. de Vidoche broke into the conversation. "What rubbish is
this?" he said, speaking roughly to his wife. "Have you finished? Then
let us pay this rascally landlord and be off. If you do not want to
spend the night on the road, that is. Where are those fools of
servants?"

He rose, and went to the door and shouted for them, and came back
and took up his cloak and hat with much movement and bustle.
But it was noticeable in all he did that he never once met the
astrologer's eye or looked his way. Even when he bade him a surly
"Good-night"--casually uttered in the midst of injunctions to his wife
to be quick--he spoke over his shoulder; and he left the room in the
same fashion, completely absorbed, it seemed, in the fastening of his
cloak.

Some, treated in this cavalier fashion, might have been hurt, and some
might have resented it. But the man in black did neither. Left alone,
he remained by the table in an expectant attitude, a sneering smile,
which the light of the candles threw into high relief, on his grim
visage. Suddenly the door opened, and M. de Vidoche, cloaked and
covered, came in. Without raising his eyes, he looked round the
room--for something he had mislaid, it seemed.

"Oh, by the way," he said suddenly, and without looking up.

"_My address?_" the man in black interjected, with a devilish
readiness. "The end of the Rue Touchet in the Quartier du Marais, near
the river. Where, believe me," he continued, with a mocking bow, "I
shall give you madame's horoscope with the greatest pleasure, or any
other little matter you may require."

"I think you are the devil!" M. de Vidoche muttered wrathfully, his
cheek growing pale.

"Possibly," the astrologer answered. "In that or any other case--_au
revoir!_"

When the landlord came up a little later to apologise to M. Solomon
Ntredame de Paris for the inconvenience to which he had unwillingly
put him, he found his guest in high good-humour. "It is nothing, my
friend--it is nothing," M. Ntredame said kindly. "I found my company
good enough. This M. de Vidoche is of this country; and a rich man, I
understand."

"Through his wife," the host said cautiously. "Ah! so rich that she
could build our old castle here from the ground again."

"Madame de Vidoche was of Pinatel."

"To be sure. Monsieur knows everything. By Jumiges to the north. I
have been there once. But she has a house in Paris besides, and
estates, I hear, in the south--in Perigord."

"Ha!" the astrologer muttered. "Perigord again. That is odd, now."




                              CHAPTER IV.

                      THE HOUSE WITH TWO DOORS.


On the site of the old Palais des Tournelles, where was held the
tournament in which Henry the Second was killed, Henry the Fourth
built the Place Royale. You will not find it called by that name in
any map of Paris of to-day; modern France, which has no history,
traditions, or reverence, has carefully erased such landmarks in
favour of her Grvys and Eiffels, her journalists and soap-boilers.
But for all that, and though the Place Royale has now lost even its
name, in the reign of the thirteenth Louis it was the centre of
fashion. The Quartier du Marais, in which it stood, opposite the Ile
de St. Louis, was then the Court quarter. It saw coaches come into
common use among the nobility, and ruffs and primero go out, and a
great many other queer things, such as Court quarters in those days
looked to see.

The back stairs of a palace, however, are seldom an improving or
brilliant place; or if they can be said to be brilliant at all, their
brightness is of a somewhat lurid and ghastly character. The king's
amusements--very royal and natural, no doubt, and, when viewed from
the proper quarter, attractive enough--have another side; and that
side is towards the back stairs. It is the same with the Court and its
purlieus. They are the rough side of the cloth, the underside of the
moss, the cancer under the fair linen. Secrets are no secrets there;
and so it has always been. Things De Thou did not know, and Brantme
only guessed at, were household words there. They in the Court
under-world knew all about that mysterious disease of which Gabrielle
d'Estres died after eating a citron at Zamet's--all, more than we
know now or has ever been printed. That little prick of a knife which
made the second Wednesday in May, 1610, a day memorable in history,
was gossip down there a month before. Henry of Cond's death,
Mazarin's marriage, D'Eon's sex, Cagliostro's birth, were no mysteries
in the by-ways of the Louvre and Petit Trianon. He who wrote "Under
the king's hearthstone are many cockroaches" knew his world--a seamy,
ugly, vicious, dangerous world.

If any street in the Paris of that day belonged to it, the Rue
Touchet did; a little street a quarter of a mile from the Place
Royale, on the verge of the Quartier du Marais. The houses on one side
of the street had their backs to the river, from which they were
divided only by a few paces of foul foreshore. These houses were older
than the opposite row, were irregularly built, and piled high with
gables and crooked chimneys. Here and there a beetle-browed passage
led beneath them to the river; and one out of every two was a tavern,
or worse. A fencing-school and a gambling-hell occupied the two
largest. To the south-west the street ended in a _cul-de-sac_, being
closed by a squat stone house, built out of the ruins of an old water
gateway that had once stood there. The windows of this house were
never unshuttered, the door was seldom opened in the daylight. It was
the abode of Solomon Ntredame. Once a week or so the astrologer's
sombre figure might be seen entering or leaving, and men at tavern
doors would point at him, and slatternly women, leaning out of window,
cross themselves. But few in the Rue Touchet knew that the house had a
second door, which did not open on the water, as the back doors of the
riverside houses did, but on a quiet street leading to it.

M. Ntredame's house was, in fact, double, and served two sorts of
clients. Great ladies and courtiers, wives of the long robe and city
madams, came to the door in the quiet street, and knew nothing of the
Rue Touchet. Through the latter, on the other hand, came those who
paid in meal, if not in malt; lackeys and waiting-maids, and skulking
apprentices and led-captains--the dregs of the quarter, sodden with
vice and crime--and knowledge.

The house was furnished accordingly. The clients of the Rue Touchet
found the astrologer in a room divided into two by scarlet hangings,
so arranged as to afford the visitor a partial view of the farther
half, where the sullen glow of a furnace disclosed alembics and
crucibles, mortars and retorts, a multitude of uncouth vessels and
phials, and all the mysterious apparatus of the alchemist. Immediately
about him the shuddering rascal found things still more striking. A
dead hand hung over each door, a skeleton peeped from a closet. A
stuffed alligator sprawled on the floor, and, by the wavering
uncertain light of the furnace, seemed each moment to be awaking to
life. Cabalistic signs and strange instruments and skull-headed staves
were everywhere, with parchment scrolls and monstrous mandrakes, and a
farrago of such things as might impose on the ignorant; who, if he
pleased, might sit on a coffin, and, when he would amuse himself,
found a living toad at his foot! Dimly seen, crowded together,
ill-understood, these things were enough to overawe the vulgar, and
had often struck terror into the boldest ruffians the Rue Touchet
could boast.

From this room a little staircase, closed at the top by a strong door,
led to the chamber and antechamber in which the astrologer received
his real clients. Here all was changed. Both rooms were hung,
canopied, carpeted with black: were vast, death-like, empty. The
antechamber contained two stools, and in the middle of the floor a
large crystal ball on a bronze stand. That was all, except the silver
hanging lamp, which burned blue, and added to the funereal gloom of
the room.

The inner chamber, which was lighted by six candles set in sconces
round the wall, was almost as bare. A kind of altar at the farther end
bore two great tomes, continually open. In the middle of the floor was
an astrolabe on an ebony pillar, and the floor itself was embroidered
in white, with the signs of the Zodiac and the twelve Houses arranged
in a circle. A seat for the astrologer stood near the altar. And that
was all. For power over such as visited him here Ntredame depended on
a higher range of ideas; on the more subtle forms of superstition, the
influence of gloom and silence on the conscience: and above all,
perhaps, on his knowledge of the world--_and them_.

Into the midst of all this came that shrinking, terrified little
mortal, Jehan. It was his business to open the door into the quiet
street, and admit those who called. He was forbidden to speak under
the most terrible penalties, so that visitors thought him dumb. For a
week after his coming he lived in a world of almost intolerable fear.
The darkness and silence of the house, the funereal lights and
hangings, the skulls and bones and horrid things he saw, and on which
he came when he least expected them, almost turned his brain. He
shuddered, and crouched hither and thither. His face grew white, and
his eyes took a strange staring look, so that the sourest might have
pitied him. It wanted, in a word, but a little to send the child stark
mad; and but for his hardy training and outdoor life, that little
would not have been wanting.

He might have fled, for he was trusted at the door, and at any moment
could have opened it and escaped. But Jehan never doubted his master's
power to find him and bring him back; and the thought did not enter
his mind. After a week or so, familiarity wrought on him, as on all.
The house grew less terrifying, the darkness lost its horror, the air
of silence and dread its first paralysing influence. He began to sleep
better. Curiosity, in a degree, took the place of fear. He fell to
poring over the signs of the Zodiac, and to taking furtive peeps into
the crystal. The toad became his playfellow. He fed it with
cockroaches, and no longer wanted employment.

The astrologer saw the change in the lad, and perhaps was not wholly
pleased with it. By-and-by he took steps to limit it. One day he found
Jehan playing with the toad with something of a boy's _abandon_,
making the uncouth creature leap over his hands, and tickling it with
a straw. The boy rose on his entrance, and shrank away; for his fear
of the man's sinister face and silent ways was not in any way
lessened. But Ntredame called him back. "You are beginning to
forget," he said, eyeing the child grimly.

The boy trembled under his gaze, but did not dare to answer.

"Whose are you?"

Jehan looked this way and that. At length, with dry lips, he muttered,
"Yours."

"No, you are not," the man in black replied. "Think again. You have a
short memory."

Jehan thought and sweated. But the man would have his answer, and at
last Jehan whispered, "The devil's."

"That is better," the astrologer said coldly. "Do you know what this
is?"

He held up a glass bowl. The boy recognised it, and his hair began to
rise. But he shook his head.

"It is holy water," the man in black said, his small cruel eyes
devouring the boy. "Hold out your hand."

Jehan dared not refuse "This will try you," Ntredame said slowly,
"whether you are the devil's or not. If not, water will not hurt you.
If so, if you are his for ever and ever, to do his will and pleasure,
then it will burn like fire!"

At the last word he suddenly sprinkled some with a brush on the boy's
hand. Jehan leapt back with a shriek of pain, and, holding the burned
hand to his breast, glared at his master with starting eyes.

"It burns," said the astrologer pitilessly, "It burns. It is as I
said. You are _his_. _His!_ After this I think you will remember. Now
go."

Jehan went away, shuddering with horror and pain. But the lesson had
not the precise effect intended. He continued to fear his master, but
he began to hate him also, with a passionate, lasting hatred strange
in a child. Though he still shrank and crouched in his presence,
behind his back he was no longer restrained by fear. The boy knew of
no way in which he could avenge himself. He did not form any plans to
that end, he did not conceive the possibility of the thing. But he
hated; and, given the opportunity, was ripe to seize it.


[Illustration: "JEHAN LEAPT BACK WITH A SHRIEK OF PAIN" (_p_. 74).]


He was locked in whenever Ntredame went out; and in this way he spent
many solitary and fearful hours. These led him, however, in the end,
to a discovery. One day, about the middle of December, while he was
poking about the house in the astrologer's absence, he found a door. I
say "found," for though it was not a secret door, it was small and
difficult to detect, being placed in the side of the straight, narrow
passage at the head of the little staircase which led from the lower
to the upper chambers. At first he thought it was locked, but coming
to examine it more closely, though in mere curiosity, he found the
handle of the latch let into a hollow of the panel. He pressed this,
and the door yielded a little.

At the time the boy was scared. He saw the place was dark, drew the
door to the jamb again, and went away without satisfying his
curiosity. But in a little while the desire to know what was behind
the door overcame his terror. He returned with a taper, and, pressing
the latch again, pushed the door open and entered, his heart beating
loudly.

He held up his taper, and saw a very narrow, bare closet, made in the
thickness of the wall. And that was all, for the place was empty--the
one and only thing it contained being a soft, rough mat which covered
the floor. The boy stared fearfully about him, still expecting
something dreadful, but there was nothing else to be seen. And
gradually his fears subsided, and his curiosity with them, and he went
out again.

Another day, however, when he came into this place, he made a
discovery. Against either wall he saw a morsel of black cloth
fastened--a little flap a few inches long and three inches wide. He
held the light first to one and then to another of these, but he could
make nothing of them until he noticed that the lower edges were loose.
Then he raised one. It disclosed a long, narrow slit, through which he
could see the laboratory, with the fire burning dully, the phials
glistening, and the crocodile going through its unceasing pretence of
arousing itself. He raised the other, and found a slit there, too; but
as the chamber on that side--the room with the astrolabe--was in
darkness, he could see nothing. He understood, however. The closet was
a spying-place, and these were Judas-holes, so arranged that the
occupant, himself unheard and unseen, could see and hear all that
happened on either side of him.

It was the astrologer's custom to lock up the large room next the Rue
Touchet when he went out. For this reason, and because the place was
forbidden, the boy lingered at the Judas-hole, gazing into it. He knew
by this time most of the queer things it contained, and the red glow
of the furnace fire gave it, to his mind, a weird kind of comfort. He
listened to the ashes falling, and the ticking of some clockwork at
the farther end. He began idly to enumerate all the things he could
see; but the curtain which shut off the laboratory proper threw a
great shadow across the room, and this he strove in vain to pierce. To
see the better, he put out his light and looked again. He had scarcely
brought his eyes back to the slit, however, when a low grating noise
caught his ear. He started and held his breath, but before he could
stir a finger the heavy door which communicated with the Rue Touchet
slowly opened a foot or two, and the astrologer came in.

For a few seconds the boy remained gazing, afraid to breathe or move.
Then, with an effort, he dropped the cloth over the slit, and crept
softly away.




                              CHAPTER V.

                          THE UPPER PORTAL.


The astrologer was not alone. A tall figure, cloaked and muffled to
the chin, entered after him, and stood waiting at his elbow while he
secured the fastenings of the door. Apparently, they had only met on
the threshold, for the stranger, after looking round him and silently
noting the fantastic disorder of the room, said, in a hoarse voice,
"You do not know me?"

"Perfectly, M. de Vidoche," the astrologer answered, removing his hat.

"Did you know I was following you?"

"I came to show you the way."

"That is a lie, at any rate!" the young noble retorted, with a sneer,
"for I did not know I was coming myself."

"Until you saw me," the astrologer answered, unmoved. "Will you not
take off your cloak? You will need it when you leave."

M. de Vidoche complied with an ill grace. "The usual stock-in-trade, I
see," he muttered, looking round him scornfully. "Skulls and bones,
and dead hands and gibbet-ropes. Faugh! The place smells. I suppose
these are the things you keep to frighten children."

"Some," Ntredame answered calmly--he was busy lighting a lamp--"and
some are for sale."

"For sale?" M. de Vidoche cried incredulously. "Who will buy them?"

"Some one thing, and some another," the astrologer answered
carelessly. "Take this, for instance," he continued, turning to his
visitor, and looking at him for the first time. "I expect to find a
customer for _that_ very shortly."

M. de Vidoche followed the direction of his finger, and shuddered,
despite himself. "That" was a coffin. "Enough of this," he said, with
savage impatience. "Suppose you get off your high horse, and come to
business. Can I sit, man, or are you going to keep me standing all
night?"

The man in black brought forward two stools, and led the way behind
the curtain. "It is warmer here," he said, pushing aside an earthen
pipkin, and clearing a space with his foot in front of the glowing
embers. "Now I am at your service, M. de Vidoche. Pray be seated."

"Are we alone?" the young noble asked suspiciously.

"Trust me for that," the astrologer answered. "I know my business."

But M. de Vidoche seemed to find some difficulty in stating his;
though he had evinced so high a regard for time a moment before. He
sat irresolute, stealing malevolent glances first at his companion,
and then at the dull, angry-looking fire. If he expected M. Ntredame
to help him, however, he did not yet know his host. The astrologer sat
patiently waiting, with every expression, save placid expectation,
discharged from his face.

"Oh, d----n you!" the young man ejaculated at last. "Have you got
nothing to say? You know what I want," he added, with irritation, "as
well as I do."

"I shall be happy to learn," the astrologer answered politely.

"Give it me without more words, and let me go!"

The astrologer raised his eyebrows. "Alas! there is a limit to
omniscience," he said, shaking his head gently. "It is true we keep it
in stock--to frighten children. But it does not help me at present, M.
de Vidoche."

M. de Vidoche looked at him with an evil scowl. "I see; you want me to
commit myself," he muttered. The perspiration stood on his forehead,
and his voice was husky with rage or some other emotion. "I was a fool
to come here," he continued. "If you must have it, I want to kill a
cat; and I want something to give to it."

The astrologer laughed silently. "The mountain was in labour, and lo!
a cat!" he said, in a tone of amusement. "And lo! a cat! Well, in that
case I am afraid you have come to the wrong place, M. de Vidoche. I
don't kill cats. There is no risk in it, you see," he continued,
looking fixedly at his companion, "and no profit. Nobody cares about a
cat. The first herbalist you come to will give you what you want for a
few sous. Even if the creature turns black within the hour, and its
mouth goes to the nape of its neck," he went on, with a horrid smile,
"as Madame de Beaufort's did--_cui malo?_--no one is a penny the
worse. But if it were a question of---- I think I saw monsieur riding
in company with Mademoiselle de Farincourt to-day?"

M. de Vidoche, who had been contemplating his tormentor with eyes of
rage and horror, started at the unexpected question. "Well," he
muttered, "and what if I was?"

"Oh, nothing," the man in black answered carelessly. "Mademoiselle is
beautiful, and monsieur is a happy man if she smiles on him. But she
is high-born; and proud, I am told." He leaned forward as he spoke,
and warmed his long, lean hands at the fire. But his beady eyes never
left the other's face.

M. de Vidoche writhed under their gaze. "Curse you!" he muttered
hoarsely. "What do you mean?"

"Her family are proud also, I am told; and powerful. Friends of the
Cardinal too, I hear." The man in black's smile was like nothing save
the crocodile's.

M. de Vidoche rose from his seat, but sat down again.

"He would avenge the honour of the family to the death," continued the
astrologer gently. "To the death, I should say. Don't you think so, M.
de Vidoche?"

The perspiration stood in thick drops on the young man's forehead, and
he glared at his tormentor. But the latter met the look placidly, and
seemed ignorant of the effect he was producing. "It is a pity,
therefore, monsieur is not free to marry," he said, shaking his head
regretfully--"a great pity. One does not know what may happen. Yet, on
the other hand, if he had not married he would be a poor man now."

M. de Vidoche sprang to his feet with an oath. But he sat down again.

"When he married he _was_ a poor man, I think," the astrologer
continued, for the first time averting his gaze from the other's
face, and looking into the fire with a queer smile. "And in debt.
Madame--the present Madame de Vidoche, I mean--paid his debts, and
brought him an estate, I believe."

"Of which she has never ceased to remind him twice a day since!" the
young man cried in a terrible voice. And then in a moment he lost all
self-control, all disguise, all the timid cunning which had marked him
hitherto. He sprang to his feet. The veins in his temples swelled, his
face grew red. So true is it that small things try us more than great
ones, and small grievances rub deeper raws than great wrongs. "My
God!" he said between his teeth, "if you knew what I have suffered
from that woman! Pale-faced, puling fool, I have loathed her these
five years, and I have been tied to her and her whining ways and her
nun's face! Twice a day? No, ten times a day, twenty times a day, she
has reminded me of my debts, my poverty, and my straits before I
married her! And of her family! And her three marshals! And her----"

He stopped for very lack of breath. "Madame was of good family?" the
man in black said abruptly. He had grown suddenly attentive. His
shadow on the wall behind him was still and straight-backed.

"Oh, yes," the husband answered bitterly.

"In Perigord?'

"Oh, yes."

"Three marshals of France?" M. Ntredame murmured thoughtfully; but
there was a strange light in his eyes, and he kept his face carefully
averted from his companion. "That is not common! That is certainly
something to boast of!"

"_Mon Dieu!_ She did boast of it, though no one else allowed the
claim. And of her blood of Roland!" M. de Vidoche cried, with scorn.
His voice still shook, and his hands trembled with rage. He strode up
and down.

"What was her name before she married?" the astrologer asked, stooping
over the fire.

The young man stopped, arrested in his passion--stopped, and looked at
him suspiciously. "Her name?" he muttered. "What has that to do with
it?"

"If you want me to--draw her horoscope," the astrologer replied, with
a cunning smile, "I must have something to go upon."

"Diane de Martinbault," the young man answered sullenly; and then, in
a fresh burst of rage, he muttered, "Diane! _Diable!_"

"She inherited her estates from her father?"

"Yes."

"Who had a son? A child who died young?" the astrologer continued
coolly.

M. de Vidoche looked at him. "That is true," he said sulkily. "But I
do not see what it has to do with you."

For answer, the man in black began to laugh, at first silently, then
aloud--a sly devil's laugh, that sounded more like the glee of fiends
sporting over a lost soul than any human mirth, so full was it of
derision and mockery and insult. He made no attempt to check or
disguise it, but rather seemed to flout it in the other's face; for
when the young noble asked him, with fierce impatience, what it was,
and what he meant, he did not explain. He only cried, "In a moment! In
a moment, noble sir, I swear you shall have what you want. But--ha!
ha!" And then he fell to laughing again, more loudly and shrilly than
before.

M. de Vidoche turned white and red with rage. His first thought was
that a trap had been laid for him, and that he had fallen into it;
that to what he had said there had been witnesses; and that now the
astrologer had thrown off the mask. With a horrible expression of
shame and fear on his countenance he stood at bay, peering into the
dark corners, of which there were many in that room, and plumbing the
shadows. When no one appeared and nothing happened, his fears passed,
but not his rage. With his hand on his sword, he turned hotly on his
confederate. "You dog!" he said between his teeth, and his eyes
gleamed dangerously in the light of the lamp, "know that for a
farthing I would slit your throat! And I will, too, if you do not this
instant stop that witch's grin of yours! Are you going to do what I
ask, or are you not?"

"Chut! chut!" the astrologer answered, waving his hand in deprecation.
"I said so, and I am always as good as my word."

"Ay, but now--now!" the young man retorted furiously. "You have played
with me long enough. Do you think that I am going to spend the night
in this charnel-house of yours?"

M. Ntredame began to fear that he had carried his cruel amusement too
far. He had enjoyed himself vastly, and made an unexpected discovery:
one which opened an endless vista of mischief and plunder to his
astute gaze. But it was not his policy to drive his customer to
distraction, and he changed his tone. "Peace, peace," he said,
spreading out his hands humbly. "You shall have it now; now, this
instant. There is only one little preliminary."

"Name it!" the other said imperiously.

"The price. A horoscope, with the House of Death in the ascendant--the
Upper Portal, as we call it--is a hundred crowns, M. de Vidoche. There
is the risk, you see."

"You shall have it. Give me the--the stuff!"

The young man's voice trembled, but it was with anger and impatience,
not with fear. The astrologer recognised the change in him, and fell
into his place. He went, without further demur, to a little shelf in
the darkest corner of the laboratory, whence he reached down a
crucible. He was in the act of peering into this, with his back to his
visitor, when M. de Vidoche uttered a startled cry, and, springing
towards him, seized his arm. "You fiend!" the young man hissed--he was
pale to the lips, and shook as with an ague--"there is someone there!
There is someone listening!"


[Illustration: "FOR A SECOND THE MAN IN BLACK STOOD BREATHLESS" (_p_.
92).]


For a second the man in black stood breathless, his hand arrested, the
shadow of his companion's terror darkening his face. M. de Vidoche
pointed with a trembling finger to the staircase which led to the
farther part of the house, and on this the two bent their sombre,
guilty eyes. The lamp burned unsteadily, giving out an odour of smoke.
The room was full of shadows, uncouth distorted shapes, that rose and
fell with the light, and had something terrifying in their sudden
appearances and vanishings. But in all the place there was nothing so
appalling or so ugly as the two vicious, panic-stricken faces that
glared into the darkness.

The man in black was the first to break the silence. "What did you
hear?" he muttered at length, after a long, long period of waiting and
watching.

"Someone moved there," Vidoche answered, under his breath. His voice
still trembled; his face was livid with terror.

"Nonsense!" the other answered. He knew the place, and was fast
recovering his courage. "What was the sound like, man?"

"A dull, heavy sound. Someone moved."

M. Ntredame laughed, but not pleasantly. "It was the toad," he said.
"There is no other living thing here. The door on the staircase is
locked. It is thick, too. A dozen men might be behind it, yet they
would not hear a word that passed in this room. But come; you shall
see."

He led the way to the farther end of the room, and, moving some of the
larger things, showed M. de Vidoche that there was no one there.
Still, the young man was only half-convinced. Even when the toad was
found lurking in a skull which had rolled to the floor, he continued
to glance about him doubtfully. "I do not think it was that," he said.
"Are you sure that the door is locked?"

"Try it," the astrologer answered curtly.

M. de Vidoche did, and nodded. "Yes," he said. "All the same, I will
get out of this, Give me the stuff, will you?"

The man in black raised the lamp in one hand, and with the other
selected from the crucible two tiny yellow packets. He stood a moment,
weighing them in his hand and looking lovingly at them, and seemed
unwilling to part with them. "They are power," he said, in a voice
that was little above a whisper. The alarm had tried even his nerves,
and he was not quite himself. "The greatest power of all--death. They
are the key of the Upper Portal--the true Pulvis Olympicus. Take one
to-day, one to-morrow, in liquid, and you will feel neither hunger,
nor cold, nor want, nor desire any more for ever. The late King of
England took one; but there, it is yours, my friend."

"Is it painful?" the young man whispered, shuddering, and with eyes
averted.

The tempter grinned horribly. "What is that to you?" he said. "It will
not bring her mouth to the back of her neck. That is enough for you to
know."

"It will not be detected?"

"Not by the bunglers they call doctors," the astrologer answered
scornfully. "Blind bats! You may trust me for that. Of what did the
King of England die? A tertian ague. So will madame. But if you
think----"

He stopped on a sudden, his hand in the air, and the two stood gazing
at one another with alarm printed on their faces. The loud clanging
note of a bell, harshly struck in the house, came dolefully to their
ears "What is it?" M. de Vidoche muttered uneasily.

"A client," the astrologer answered quietly. "I will see. Do not stir
until I come back to you."

M. de Vidoche made an impatient movement towards the door in the Rue
Touchet: and doubtless he would much have preferred to be gone at
once, since he had now got what he wanted. But the man in black was
already unlocking the door at the head of the little staircase, and
uttering a querulous oath M. de Vidoche resigned himself to wait. With
a dark look he hid the powders on his person.

                          *   *   *   *   *

He thought himself alone. But all the same a white-faced boy lay
within a few feet of him, watching his every movement, and listening
to his breathing--a small boy, instinct with hate and loathing.
Impunity renders people careless, or M. Ntredame would not have been
so ready to set down the noise his confederate made to the toad. The
Judas-hole and the spying-place would have come to mind, and in a
trice he would have caught the listener in the act, and this history
would never have been written.

For Jehan, though his master's first entrance and appearance had sent
him fleeing, breathless and panic-stricken, from his post, had not
been able to keep aloof long. The house was dull, silent, dark; only
in the closet was amusement to be found. So while terror dragged him
one way, curiosity haled him the other, and at last had the victory.
He listened and shivered at the head of the stairs until that shrill
eldritch peal of laughter in which the astrologer indulged, and for
which he was destined to pay dearly, penetrated even the thick door.
Then he could hold out no longer. His curiosity grew intolerable.
Laughter! Laughter in that house! Slowly and stealthily the boy opened
the door of the dark closet, and crept in. Just across the threshold
he stumbled over the extinguished taper, and this it was which caused
M. de Vidoche's alarm.

Jehan fancied himself discovered, and lay sweating and trembling until
the search for the toad was over. Then he sat up, and, finding himself
safe, began to listen. What he heard was not clear, nor perfectly
intelligible; but gradually there stole even into his boyish mind a
perception of something horrible. The speakers' looks of fear, their
low tones and dark glances, the panic which seized them when they
fancied themselves overheard, and their relief when nothing came of
it, did more to bring the conviction home to his mind than their
words. Even of these he caught enough to assure him that someone was
to be poisoned--to be put out of the world. Only the name of the
victim--that escaped him.

                          *   *   *   *   *

Probably M. de Vidoche, left to himself, found, his thoughts poor
company, for by-and-by he grew restless. He walked across the room and
listened, and walked again and listened. The latter movement brought
him by chance to the foot of the little flight of six steps by which
the astrologer had retired, and he looked up and saw that the door at
the top was ajar. Impelled by curiosity, or suspicion, or the mere
desire to escape from himself, he stole up, and, opening it farther,
thrust his head through and listened.

He remained in this position about a minute. Then he turned, and crept
down again, and stood, thinking, at the foot of the stairs, with an
expression of such utter and complete amazement on his face as almost
transformed the man. Something he had heard or seen which he could not
understand! Something incredible, something almost miraculous! For all
else, even his guilty purpose, seemed swallowed up in sheer
astonishment.

The stupor held him until he heard the astrologer's steps. Even then
he only turned and looked. But if ever dumb lips asked a question, his
did then.

The man in black nodded silently. He seemed not at all surprised that
the other had heard or seen what he had. Even in him the thing,
whatever it was, had worked a change. His eyes shone, his eyebrows
were raised, his face wore a pale smile of triumph and conceit.

M. de Vidoche found his voice at last "My wife!" he whispered.

The astrologer's shoulders went up to his ears. He spread out his
hands. He nodded--once, twice. "_Mais oui, Madame!_" he said.

"Here?--now?" M. de Vidoche stammered, his eyes wide with
astonishment.

"She is in the chamber of the astrolabe."

"_Mon Dieu!_" the husband exclaimed. "_Mon Dieu!_" And then for a
moment he shook, as if someone were passing over his grave. His face
was pale. There was dread mingled with his surprise. "I do not
understand," he muttered at last. "What does it mean? What is she
doing here?"

"She has come for a love-philtre," M. Ntredame answered, with a
sphinx-like smile.

"For whom?"

"For you."

The husband drew a deep breath. "For me?" he exclaimed. "Impossible!"

"Possible," the man in black answered quietly; "and true."

"Then what shall you do?"

"Give her one," the astrologer answered. The enigmatical smile, which
had been all along playing on his face, grew deeper, keener, more
cruel. His eyes gleamed with triumph--and evil. "I shall give her
one," he said again.

"But--what will she do with it?" M. de Vidoche muttered.

"_Take it!_ You fool, cannot you understand?" the man in black
answered sharply. "Give me back the powders. I shall give them to her.
She will take them--_herself_. You will be saved--all!"

M. de Vidoche reeled. "My God!" he cried. "I think you are the devil!"

"Perhaps," the man in black answered "but give me the powders."




                              CHAPTER VI.

                      THE POWDER OF ATTRACTION.


Meanwhile, a few yards away, in the room of the astrolabe, Madame de
Vidoche sat, waiting and trembling, afraid to move from the spot where
the astrologer had placed her, and longing for his return. The minutes
seemed endless, the house a grave. The silence and mystery which
wrapped her round, the sombre hangings, the burning candles, the
cabalistic figures filled her with awe and apprehension. She was a
timid woman; nothing but that last and fiercest hunger of all, the
hunger for love, could have driven her to this desperate step or
brought her here. But she was here, it had brought her; and though
fear blanched her cheek, and her limbs shook under her, and she dared
not pray--for what was this she was doing?--she did not repent, or
wish the step untaken, or go back on her desire.

The place was dreadful to her; but not so dreadful as the cold home,
the harsh words, the mockery of love, the slowly growing knowledge
that there never had been love, from which she was here to escape. She
was alone, but not more lonely than she had been for months in her own
house. The man who daily met her with gibes and taunts, and seldom
spoke without reminding her how pale and colourless she showed beside
the florid witty beauties of the Court--_his friends_--was still her
all, and had been her idol. If he failed her, the world was empty
indeed. Only one thing remained therefore; by hook or crook, by all a
woman might do or dare, by submission, by courage, to win back his
love. She had tried. God knows she had tried! She had knelt to him,
and he had struck her. She had dressed and been gay, and striven to
jest as his friends jested: he had scourged her with a cutting sneer.
She had prayed, and Heaven had not answered. She had turned from
Heaven--a white-faced, pining woman, little more than a girl--and she
was here.

Only let the man be quick! Let him be quick and give her what she
sought; and then scarcely any price he could ask should strain her
gratitude. At last she heard his step, and in a moment he came in.
Against the black background, and seen by the gloomy light of the
candles, he looked taller, leaner, paler, more sombre than life. His
eyes glowed with unnatural lustre. Madame shuddered as he came towards
her; and he saw it, and grinned behind his cadaverous mask.

"Madame," he said gravely, bowing his head, "it is as I hoped. Venus
is in the ascendant for nine days from to-day, and in fortunate
conjunction with Mars. I am happy that you come to me at a time so
propitious. A very little effort at this season will suffice. But it
is necessary, if you would have the charm work, to preserve the most
absolute silence and secrecy in regard to it."

Her lips were dry, her tongue seemed to cleave to her mouth. She felt
shame as well as fear in this man's presence. But she made an effort,
and muttered, "It will work?"

"I will answer for it!" he replied bluntly, a world of dubious meaning
in his tone and eyes. "It is the powder of attraction, by the use of
which Diane de Poitiers won the love of the king, though she surpassed
him by twenty years; and Madame de Valentinois held the hearts of men
till her seventieth winter. Madame de Hautefort uses it. It is made of
liquid gold, etherealised and strengthened with secret drugs. I have
made up two packets, but it will be safer if madame will take both at
once, dissolved in good wine and before the expiration of the ninth
day."

Madame de Vidoche took the packets, trembling. A little red dyed her
pale cheeks. "Is that all?" she murmured, faintly.

"All, madame; except that when you drink it, you must think of your
husband," he answered. As he said this he averted his face; for, try
as he would, he could not check the evil smile that curled his lip.
_Dieu!_ Was ever so grim a jest known? Or so forlorn, so helpless, so
infantine a fool? He could almost find it in his heart to pity her. As
for her husband--ah, how he would bleed him when it was over!

"How much am I to pay you, sir?" she asked timidly, when she had
hidden away the precious packets in her bosom. She had got what she
wanted; she was panting to be gone.

"Twenty crowns," he answered, coldly. "The charm avails for nine
moons. After that----"

"I shall need more?" she asked; for he had paused.

"Well, no, I think not," he answered slowly--hesitating strangely,
almost stammering. "I think in your case, madame, the effect will be
lasting."

She had no clue to the fantastic impulse, the ghastly humour, which
inspired the words; and she paid him gladly. He would not take the
money in his hands, but bade her lay it on the great open book,
"because the gold was alloyed, and not virgin." In one or two other
ways he played his part; directing her, for instance, if she would
increase the strength of the charm, to gaze at the planet Venus for
half an hour each evening, but not through glass or with any metal on
her person. And then he let her out by the door which opened on the
quiet street.

"Madame has, doubtless, her woman, or some attendant?" he said,
looking up and down. "Or I----"

"Oh, yes, yes!" she answered, gasping in the cold night air. "She is
here. Goodnight, sir."

He muttered some words in a strange tongue, and, as Madame de
Vidoche's attendant came out of the shadow to meet her, turned and
went in again.

The night was dark as well as cold, but madame, in the first fervour
of her spirits, did not heed it. She suffered her maid to wrap her up
warmly, and draw the cloak more closely round her throat; but she was
scarcely conscious of the attention, and bore it as a child might--in
silence. Her eyes shone in the darkness; her heart beat with a soft
subtle joy. She had the charm--the key to happiness! It was in her
bosom; and every moment, under cover of the cloak and night, her
fingers flew to it and assured her it was safe. The scruples with
which she had contemplated the interview troubled her no longer. In
her joy and relief that the ordeal was over and the philtre gained,
she knew no doubt, no suspicion. She lived only for the moment when
she might put the talisman to the test, and see love wake again in
those eyes which, whether they smiled or scowled, fate had made the
lodestones of her life.

The streets, by reason of the cold, were quiet enough. No one remarked
the two women as they flitted along under cover of the wall.
Presently, however, the bell of a church close at hand began to ring
for service, and the sound, startling madame, brought her suddenly,
chillily, sharply, to earth again. She stopped. "What is that?" she
said. "It cannot be compline. It wants three hours of midnight."

"It is St. Thomas's Day," the woman with her answered.

"So it is," madame replied, moving on again, but more slowly. "Of
course; it is four days to Christmas. Don't they call him the Apostle
of Faith, Margot?"

"Yes, madame."

"To be sure," madame rejoined thoughtfully. "To be sure; yes, we
should have faith--we should have faith." And with that she buoyed
herself up again (as people will in certain moods, using the strangest
floats), and went on gaily, her feet tripping to the measure of her
heart, and her hand on the precious packet that was to change the
world for her. On the foullest mud gleams sometimes the brightest
phosphorescence: otherwise it were not easy to conceive how even
momentary happiness could come of the house in the Rue Touchet!

The two women had nearly reached the Church of St. Gervais by the
Grve, when the sound of a swift stealthy footstep coming along the
street behind them caught the maid's ear. It was not a reassuring
sound at night and in that place. The dark square of the Grve, swept
by the icy wind from the river, lay before them; and though a brazier,
surrounded by a knot of men belonging to the watch, burned in the
middle of the open, the two women were reluctant to show themselves
where they might meet with rudeness. Margot laid her hand on her
mistress's arm, and for a few seconds the two stood listening, with
thumping hearts. The step came on--a light, pattering step. Acting on
a common impulse the women turned and looked at one another. Then
slipping noiselessly into the shadow cast by the church porch, they
pressed themselves against the wall, and stood scarcely daring to
breathe.

But fortune was against them, or their follower's eye was keen beyond
the ordinary. They had not been there many seconds before he came
running up--a stooping figure, slight and short. He slackened speed
abruptly, and stopped exactly opposite their lurking-place. A moment
of suspense, and then a pale face, rendered visible by a gleam from
the distant fire, looked in on them, and a thin, panting voice
murmured timidly, "Madame! Madame de Vidoche, if you please!"


[Illustration: "'MADAME! MADAME DE VIDOCHE, IF YOU PLEASE!'" (_p_.
112)]


"Saint Sige!" madame's woman gasped, in a voice of astonishment. "I
declare it is a child!"

Madame almost laughed in her relief. "Ah!" she said, "how you
frightened us! I thought you were a man dogging us--a thief!"

"I am not," the boy said simply.

This time Margot laughed. "Who are you, then?" she asked, briskly
stepping out, "and why have you been following us? You seem to have my
lady's name pretty pat," she added, sharply.

"I want to speak to her," the boy answered, his lip trembling. In
truth, he was trembling all over with fear and excitement. But the
darkness hid that.

"Oh!" Madame de Vidoche said graciously. "Well, you may speak. But
tell me first who you are, and be quick about it. It is cold and
late."

"I am from the house where you have been," Jehan answered bravely.
"You saw me at Les Andelys, too, when you were at supper, madame. I
was the boy at the door. I want to speak to you alone, please."

"Alone!" madame exclaimed.

The boy nodded firmly. "If you please," he said.

"Hoity-toity!" Margot exclaimed; and she was for demurring. "He only
wants to beg," she said.

"I don't!" the boy cried, with tears in his voice.

"Then it is a present he wants!" she rejoined, scornfully. "They
expect their vales at those places. And we are to freeze while he
makes a tale."

But madame, out of pity or curiosity, would hear him. She bade the
woman wait a few paces away. And when they were alone: "Now," she said
kindly, "what is it? You must be quick, for it is very cold."

"_He_ sent me after you--with a message," Jehan answered.

Madame started, and her hand went to the packet. "Do you mean M.
Ntredame?" she murmured.

The boy nodded. "He--he said he had forgotten one thing," he
continued, halting between his sentences and shivering. "He--he said
you were to alter one thing, madame."

"Oh!" Madame answered frigidly, her heart sinking, her pride roused by
this intervention of the boy, who seemed to know all. "What thing, if
you please?"

Jehan looked quickly and fearfully over his shoulder. But all was
quiet. "He said he had forgotten that your husband was dark," he
stammered.

"Dark!" madame muttered in astonishment.

"Yes, dark-complexioned," Jehan continued desperately. "And that being
so, you were not to take the--the charm yourself."

Madame's eyes flashed with anger. "Oh!" she said, "indeed! And is that
all?"

"But to give it to him, without telling him," the boy rejoined, with
sudden spirit and firmness.

Madame started and drew a deep breath. "Are you sure you have made no
mistake?" she said, trying to read the boy's face. But it was too dark
for that.

"Quite sure," he answered hardily.

"Oh," madame said, slowly and thoughtfully; "very well. Is that all?"

"That is all," he replied, drawing back a step; but reluctantly, as it
seemed.

Margot, who had been all the time moving a little nearer and a little
nearer, came right up at this. "Now, my lady," she said sharply, "I
beg you will have done. This is no place for us at this time of night,
and this little imp of Satan ought to be about his business. I am sure
I am perishing with cold, and the sound of those creaking boats on the
river makes me think of nothing but gibbets and corpses, till I have
got the creeps all down my back! And the watch will be here
presently."

"Very well, Margot," madame answered; "I am coming." But still she
looked at the boy and lingered. "You are sure there is nothing else?"
she murmured.

"Nothing," he answered.

She thought his manner odd, and wondered why he lingered; why he did
not hurry off, since the night was cold and he was bareheaded. But
Margot pressed her again, and she turned, saying reluctantly, "Very
well, I am coming."

"Ay, and so is Christmas!" the woman grumbled. And this time she
fairly took her by the arm and hurried her away.

"That is not a good retort, Margot!" madame said presently, when they
had gone a few paces, and were flitting hand-in-hand across the Grve,
with heads bent to the wind, "for it wants only four days to
Christmas. You had forgotten that!"

"I think you are fey, my lady!" the woman replied, in an ill-temper.
"I have not seen you so gay these twelve months; and what with the
cold, and fear of the watch and monsieur, I am ready to sink. You must
have heard fine news down there."

But madame did not answer. She was thinking of last Christmas. Her
husband had gone to the revels at the Palais Cardinal, which was then
in building. She had offered to go with him, and he had told her, with
an oath, that if she did she should remember it. So she had stopped at
home alone--her first Christmas in Paris. She had gone to mass, and
then had sat all day in the cold, splendid house, and cried. Half the
servants had played truant, and her woman had been cross, and for
hours together no one had gone near her.

This Christmas it was to be different.

Madame's eyes began to shine again, and her heart to beat a pleasant
measure. If she had her will, they would go to no pageants or
merry-makings. But then he liked such things, and showed to advantage
in them. Yes, they would go, and she would sit quiet as a mouse; and
listening while they praised him, would feed all the time on the sweet
knowledge that now he was hers--her own.

She had not done dreaming when they reached the house. The porter was
drowsing in his lodge, the gate was ajar. They slipped into the dark
silent courtyard, and, flitting across it, entered the house. Two
servants lay stretched asleep in the hall, and in a little room to the
left of the door they could hear others talking; but no one looked
out. Fortune could not have aided them better. With a little laugh of
relief and thankfulness madame tripped up the grand staircase and
under the great lamp which lit it and the hall.

Marmot followed, but neither she nor her mistress saw who followed
them: who had followed them across the windy Grve, through street and
lane and byway; even, after a moment's hesitation, over the threshold
of the court and into the house. A servant who heard the stairs creak
as they went up, and looked out, fancied he saw a small black figure
glide out of sight above; but as there were no children in the house,
and this was a child, if anything, he thought his eyes deceived
him--he was half-asleep--and, crossing himself, went back, yawning.

The boy could never quite explain--though often asked in
after-years--what led him to run this risk. It is true he dared not
return to the Rue Touchet; and he was only twelve years old, and knew
nowhere else to go. But---- However, that is all that can be said. He
did follow them.

He paused at the head of the stairs, and stood shivering under the
great lamp. In front of him hung a pair of heavy curtains. After a
moment's hesitation he crept between them and found himself in a
splendid apartment, spacious though sparely furnished, lit from
the roof, and in character half-hall, half-parlour. A high marble
chimney-piece in the new Italian mode faced him, and on either hand
were two lofty doorways screened by curtains. The floor was of
parquet, the walls were panelled in chestnut wood. On each side of the
fire, which smouldered low between the dogs and was nearly out, a long
bench, velvet-covered, ran along the wall. A posset-cup stood on a
tripod on the hearth, and in the middle of the room a marble table
bore a dish of sweetmeats and a tray of flasks and glasses. In that
day, when people dined at eleven and supped at six, it was customary
to take _les pices et le vin du coucher_ before retiring at nine.

The boy stood cowering and listening--a strange, pale-faced little
figure, reflected in a narrow mirror which decked one wall. It was
very cold even here; outside he must die of cold. He heard the two
women moving and talking in one of the rooms on the left; otherwise
the house was still. He looked about, hesitated, and at last stole on
tip-toe across the floor to one of the doors on his right. The curtain
which hid it trailed a yard on the ground. He sat down between it and
the door, and, winding one corner of the thick heavy stuff round his
frozen limbs, uttered a sigh of relief. He had found a refuge of a
kind.

He meant to sleep, but he could not, for all his nerves were tense
with excitement. Not a sound in the house escaped him. He heard the
soft ashes sink on the hearth; he heard one of the men who slept in
the hall turn and moan in his sleep. At last, quite close to him, a
door opened.

Jehan moved a little and peered from his ambush. The noise had come
from madame's room. He was not surprised when he saw her face thrust
out. Presently she put the curtain quite aside and came out, and stood
a little way from him, listening intently. She wore a loose robe of
some soft stuff, and he fancied she was barefoot, for she moved
without noise.

She stood listening a full minute, with her hand to her bosom. Then
she nodded, as if assured that all was well, and, going to the table,
looked down at the things it held. Her face wore a subtle smile, her
cheeks flamed softly, there was a shy sparkle in her eyes. The lamp
seemed to lend her new loveliness.

Apparently she did not find what she wanted on the table, for in a
moment she turned and went to the fireplace. She took the posset from
the trivet, and, lifting the lid of the cup, looked in. What she saw
appeared to satisfy her, for with a quick movement she carried the cup
to the table and set it down open. She had her back to Jehan now, and
he could not see what she was doing, though he watched her every
motion and partly guessed. When she had finished whatever it was, she
raised the cup to her lips, and the boy's heart stood still. Ay, stood
still! He half rose, his face white. But he was in error. She only
kissed the wine and covered it, and took it back to the trivet,
murmuring something over it as she set it down.


[Illustration: HE WATCHED HER EVERY MOTION "(_p_. 124).]


The boy lay still, like one fascinated, while madame, clasping two
little silk bags to her bosom, stole back to her door. As she raised
the curtain with one hand she turned on a sudden impulse and kissed
the other towards the hearth. Slowly the curtain fell and hid her
shining eyes.




                             CHAPTER VII.

                            CLYTMNESTRA.


She had barely disappeared when the boy, listening eagerly, heard
the great door below flung open, and instinctively sank down again.
A breath of cold air rose from below. A harsh voice--a voice he
knew--cursed someone or something in the hall, a heavy step came
stumbling up the stairs, and in a moment M. de Vidoche, followed by a
sleepy servant, pushed his way through the curtains. He was flushed
with drink, yet he was not drunk, for as he crossed the floor he shot
a swift sidelong glance at his wife's door--a glance of dark meaning;
and, though he railed savagely at the servant for letting the fire go
out, he had the air of listening while he spoke, and swore, to show
himself at ease.

The man muttered some excuse, and, kneeling, began to blow the embers,
while Vidoche looked on moodily. He had not taken off his hat and
cloak. "Has madame been out this evening?" he said suddenly.

"No, my lord."

"Her woman is lying with her?"

"Yes, my lord."

A moment's silence. Then, "Trim the lamp, curse you! Don't you see it
is going out? Do you want to leave me in the dark? _Sacr!_ This might
be a pigsty from the way it is kept!"

The man was used to be kicked and abused, but it seemed to him that
his master's caprices were taking a fresh direction. It was not his
business to think, however. He trimmed the lamp and took the cloak and
hat, and was going, when Vidoche called him back again. "Put on a
log," he said, "and give me that drink. _Nom du diable_, it is cold!
You lazy hound, you have been sleeping!"

The man vowed he had not, and M. de Vidoche listened to his
protestations as if he heard them. In reality his thoughts were busy
with other things. Would it be tonight, or to-morrow, or the next day?
he was wondering darkly. And how would it--take her? Would he be
there, or would they come and tell him? Would she sicken and fade
slowly, and die of some common illness to all appearance, with the
priest by her side? Or would he awake in the night to hear her
screaming, and be summoned to see her writhing in torture, gasping,
choking, praying them to save--to save her from this horrible pain?
God! The perspiration broke out on his brow. He shivered. "Give me
that!" he muttered hoarsely, holding out a shaking hand. "Give it me,
I say!"

The man was warming the posset, but he rose hastily and handed it.

"Put lights in my room! And, hark you--you will sleep there to-night.
I am not well. Go and get your straw, and be quick about it."

Vidoche listened with the cup in his hand while the man went down and
fetched a taper and some coverings from the hall, and, coming up
again, opened one of the doors on the right--not the one against which
the boy lay. The servant went into the room and busied himself there
for a time, while the master sat crouching over the fire, thinking,
with a gloomy face. He tried to turn his thoughts to the Farincourt,
and to what would happen afterwards, and to a dozen things with which
his mind had been only too ready to occupy itself of late. But now
his thoughts would not be ordered. They returned again and again to
the door on his left. He caught himself listening, waiting, glancing
at it askance. And this might go on for days. _Dieu!_ the house would
be a hell! He would go away. He would make some excuse to leave
until--until after Christmas.

He shivered, cursed himself under his breath for a fool, and drank
half the mulled wine at a draught. As he took the cup from his lips,
his ear caught a slight sound behind him, and, starting, he peered
hastily over his shoulder. But the noise came apparently from the next
room, where the servant was moving about; and, with another oath,
Vidoche drained the cup and set it down on the table.

He had scarcely done so when he drew himself suddenly upright and
remained in that position for a moment, his mouth half open, his eyes
glaring. A kind of spasm seized him. His teeth shut with a click. He
staggered and clutched at the table. His face grew red--purple. His
brain seemed to be bursting; his eyes filled with blood. He tried to
cry, to give the alarm, to get breath, but his throat was held in an
iron vice. He was choking and reeling on his feet, when the man came
by chance out of the bedroom.

By a tremendous effort Vidoche spoke. "Who--made--this?" he muttered,
in a hissing voice.

The servant started, scared by his appearance. He answered,
nevertheless, that he had mixed it himself.

"Look at--the bottom of--the cup!" Vidoche replied in a terrible
voice. He was swaying to and fro, and kept himself up only by his grip
on the table. "Is there--anything there?"

The servant was terribly frightened, but he had the sense to obey. He
took up the cup and looked in it. "Is there--a powder--in it?" Vidoche
asked, a frightful spasm distorting his features.

"There is--something," the man answered, his teeth chattering. "But
let me fetch help, my lord. You are not well. You are----"

"A dead man!" the baffled murderer cried, his voice rising in a scream
of indescribable despair and horror. "A dead man! I am poisoned! My
wife!" He reeled with that word. He lost his hold of the table. "Ha,
_mon Dieu!_ Mercy! Mercy!" he cried.

In a moment he was down, writhing on the floor, and uttering shriek on
shriek: cries so dreadful that on the instant doors flew open and
sleepers awoke, and in a twinkling the room--though the lamp lay
quenched, overturned in his struggles--was full of lights and
frightened faces and huddled forms, and women who stopped their ears
and wept. The doorways framed more faces, the staircase rang with
sounds of alarm. Everywhere was turmoil and a madness of hurrying
feet. One ran for the doctor, another for the priest, a third for the
watch. The house seemed on a sudden alive; nay, the very courtyard,
where the porter was gone from his post, and the doors stood open, was
full of staring strangers, who gaped at the windows and the hurrying
lights, and asked whose was the hotel, or answered it was M. de
Vidoche's.


[Illustration: "IN A MOMENT HE WAS DOWN, WRITHING ON THE FLOOR" (_p_.
133).]


It had been. But already the man who had gone up the stairs so full of
strength and evil purpose lay dying, speechless, all but dead. They
had lifted him on to a pallet which someone drew from a neighbouring
room, and at first there had been no lack of helpers or ready hands.
One untied his cravat, and another his doublet, and two or three of
the coolest held him in his paroxysms. But then the magic word
"Poison!" was whispered; and one by one, all, even the man who had
been with him, even madame's woman, drew off, and left those two
alone. The livid body lay on the pallet, and madame, stunned and
horror-stricken, hung over it; but the servants stood away in a dense
circle, and looking on with gloom and fear in their faces, some
mechanically holding lights, some still grasping the bowls and basins
they were afraid to use, whispered that word again and again.

It seemed as if the tell-tale syllables passed the walls; for the
first to arrive, before doctor or priest, was the captain of the
watch. He came upstairs, his sword clanking, and, thrusting the
curtains aside, stood looking at the strange scene, which the many
lights, irregularly held and distributed, lit up as if it had been a
pageant on the stage. "Who is it?" he muttered, touching the nearest
servant on the arm.

"M. de Vidoche," the man answered.

"Is he dead?"

The man cringed before him. "Dead, or as good," he whispered. "Yes,
sir."

"Then he is not dead?"

"I do not know, sir."

"Then why the devil are you all standing like mutes at a funeral?" the
soldier answered, with an oath. "Leaving madame alone, too. Poison,
eh? Oh!" and he whistled softly. "So that is why you are all looking
on as if the man had got the plague, is it? A pretty set of curs you
are! But here is the doctor. Out of the way now," he added
contemptuously, "and let no one leave the room."

He went forward with the physician, and, while the latter knelt and
made his examination, the captain muttered a few words of comfort in
madame's ear. For all she heard or heeded, however, he might have
spared his pains. She had been summoned so abruptly, and the call had
so entirely snapped the thread of her thoughts, that she had not yet
connected her husband's illness with any act of hers. She had
absolutely forgotten the enterprise of the evening, its anticipations
and hopes. For the time she was spared that horror. But this illness
alone sufficed to overwhelm her, to sink her beyond the reach of
present comfort. She no longer remembered her husband's coldness, but
only the early days when he had come to her in her country home, a
black-bearded, bold-eyed Apollo, and wooed her impetuously and with
irresistible will. All his faults, all his unkindnesses, were
forgotten now: only his beauty, his vigour, his great passion, his
courage were remembered. A dreadful pain seized her heart when she
recognised that his had ceased to beat. She peered white-faced into
the physician's eyes, she hung on his lips. If she remembered her
journey to the Rue Touchet at all, it was only to think how futile her
hopes were now. He, whom she would have won back to her, was gone from
her for ever!

The doctor shook his head gravely as he rose. He had tried to bleed
the patient, without waiting, in this emergency, for a barber to be
summoned; but the blood would not flow. "It is useless," he said. "You
must have courage, madame. More courage than is commonly required," he
continued, in a tone of solemnity, almost of severity. He looked round
and met the captain's eyes. He made him a slight sign.

"He is dead?" she muttered.

"He is dead," the physician answered slowly. "More, madame--my task
goes farther. It is my duty to say that he has been poisoned."

"Dead!" she muttered, with a dry sob. "Dead!"

"Poisoned, I said, madame," the physician answered almost harshly. "In
an older man the symptoms might be taken for those of apoplexy. But in
this case not so. M. de Vidoche has been poisoned."

"You are clear on the point?" the captain of the watch said. He was a
grey-haired, elderly man, lately transferred from the field to the
slums of Paris, and his kindly nature had not been wholly obliterated
by contact with villainy.

"Perfectly," the doctor answered. "More, the poison must have been
administered within the hour."

Madame rose shivering from the dead man's side. This new terror, so
much worse than that of death, seemed to thrust her from him, to raise
a barrier between them. The soft white robe she had thrown round her
when she ran from her bed was not whiter than her cheeks; the lights
were not brighter than her eyes, distended with horror. "Poisoned!"
she muttered. "Impossible! Who would poison him?"

"That is the question, madame," the captain of the watch answered, not
without pity--not without admiration. "And if, as we are told, the
poison must have been given within the hour, it should not be
difficult to answer it. Let no one leave the room," he continued,
pulling his moustachios. "Where is the valet who waited on M. de
Vidoche?"

The man stood forward from the rest, shaking with alarm, and told
briefly all he knew; how he had left his master in his usual health,
and found him in some kind of seizure; how Vidoche had bidden him look
in the cup, and how he had found a sediment in it which should not
have been there.

"You mixed this wine yourself?" the captain of the watch said sharply.

The man allowed he had, whimpering and excusing himself.

"Very well. Let me see madame's woman," was the answer. "Which is she?
She is here, I suppose. Let her stand out."

A dozen hands were ready to point her out, a dozen lights were held up
that the Chevalier du Guet might see her the better. She was pushed,
nudged, impelled forward, until she stood trembling where the man had
stood. But not for long. The captain's first question was still on his
lips when, with a sudden gesture of despair, the woman threw herself
on her knees before him, and, grovelling in a state of abject terror,
cried out that she would tell all--all! All if they would let her go!
All if they would not torture her!

The captain's face grew stern, the lines about his mouth hardened.
"Speak!" he said curtly, and with a swift side-glance at the mistress,
who stood as if turned to stone. "Speak, but the truth only, woman!"
while a murmur of astonishment and fear ran round the circle.

It should be mentioned that at this time the crime of secret poisoning
was held in especial abhorrence in France, the poisoning of husbands
by wives more particularly. It was believed to be common; it was
suspected in many cases where it could not be proved. Men felt
themselves at the mercy of women who, sharing their bed and board,
had often the motive and always the opportunity; and in proportion as
the crime was easy of commission and difficult to detect was the
rigour with which it was rewarded when detected. The high rank of
the Princess of Cond--a Tremouille by birth and a Bourbon by
marriage--did not avail to save her from torture when suspected of
this; while the sudden death of a man of position was often sufficient
to expose his servants, and particularly his wife's confidante, to the
horrors of the question. Madame's woman knew all this. Such things
formed the gossip of her class, and in a paroxysm of fear, in terror,
in dread lest the moment should pass and another forestall her, she
flung both fidelity and prudence to the winds.

"I will! I will! All!" she cried. "And I swear it is true! She went
to a house in the Tournelles quarter to-night!"

"She? Who is she, woman?" the captain asked sharply.

"My lady there! She stayed an hour. I waited outside. As we came back
a boy ran after us, and talked with her by the porch of St. Gervais.
She sent me away, and I do not know what was his business. But after
we got home, and when she thought me asleep, she crept out of the room
and came here, and put something in that cup. I heard her go, and
stole to the door, and through the curtains saw her do it, but I did
not know what it was, or what she intended. I have told the truth. But
I did not know, I did not! I swear I did not!"

The captain silenced her protestations with a fierce gesture, and
turned from her to the woman she accused. "Madame," he said, in a low,
unsteady voice, "is this true?"

She stood with both her hands on her breast, and looked, with a face
of stone, not at him, but beyond him. She scarcely seemed to breathe,
so perfect was the dreadful stillness which held her. He thought she
did not hear: and he was about to repeat his question when she moved
her lips in a strange, mechanical fashion, and, after an effort,
spoke. "Is it true?" she whispered--in that stricken silence every
syllable was audible, and even at her first word some women fell to
shuddering--"is it true that I have killed my husband? Yes, I have
killed him. I loved him, and I have killed him. I loved him--I had no
one else to love--and I have killed him. God has let this be in this
world. You are real, and I am real. It is no dream. He has let it be."

"_Mon Dieu!_" the captain muttered, while one woman broke into noisy
weeping. "She is mad!"

But madame was not mad, or only mad for the moment. "It is strange,"
she continued, with writhing lips, but in the same even tone--which to
those who had ears to hear was worse than any loud outcry--"that such
a thing should be. God should not let it be, because I loved him. I
loved him, and I have killed him. I--but perhaps I shall awake
presently and find it a dream. Or perhaps he is not dead. Is he? Ha!
is he, man? Tell me!"

With the last words, which leapt from her lips in sudden frantic
questioning, she awoke as from a trance. She sprang towards the
doctor; then, turning swiftly, looked where the corpse lay, and with a
dreadful peal of laughter threw herself upon it. Her shrill cries so
filled the air, so rang through the empty hall below, so pierced the
brain, that the captain raised his hands to his ears, and the men
shrank back, looking at the women.

"See to her!" said the captain, stamping his foot in a rage and
addressing the physician. "I must take her away, but I cannot take her
like this. See to her, man. Give her something; drug her, poison her,
if you like--anything to stop her! Her cries will ring in my ears a
twelvemonth hence. Well, woman, what is it?" he continued impatiently.
Madame's woman had touched his arm.

"The boy!" she muttered. "The boy!" Her teeth were chattering with
terror. She pointed to the place where the servants stood most thickly
near the great curtains which shut off the staircase.

He followed the direction of her hand, but saw nothing except scared
faces and cringing figures. "What boy, woman?" he retorted. "What do
you mean?"

"The boy who came after us to the church," she answered. "I saw him a
minute ago--there! He was standing behind that man, looking under his
arm."

Three strides brought the captain of the watch to the place indicated.
But there was no boy there--there was no boy to be seen. Moreover, the
frightened servants who stood in that part declared that they had seen
no boy--that no boy could have been there. The captain, believing that
they had had eyes only for Madame de Vidoche, put small faith in their
protestations; but the fact remained that the boy was gone, and the
searcher returned baffled and perplexed: more than half inclined to
think that this might be a ruse on the woman's part, yet at a loss to
see what good it could do her. He asked her roughly how old the boy
was.

"About twelve," she answered, looking nervously over her shoulder. In
truth, she began to fancy that the boy was a familiar. Or what could
bring him here? How had he entered? And whither had he vanished?

"How was he dressed?" the captain asked angrily, waving back the
servants, who would have pressed on him in their curiosity.

"In black velvet," she answered. "But he had no cap. He was
bareheaded. And I noticed that he had black hair and blue eyes."

"Are you sure that the boy you saw here was the boy who followed you
and spoke to madame in the street?" he urged. "Be careful, woman!"

"I am certain of it," she answered feverishly. "I knew him in a
moment."

"Are you sure that madame did not bring him in with you?"

She vowed positively that she had not, and equally positively that the
boy could not have followed them in without being seen. In this we
know that she was mistaken; but she believed it, and her belief
communicated itself to her questioner.

He rubbed his head with his hand in extreme perplexity. If the boy
were a messenger from the villain whom this wretched woman had been to
visit, what could have brought him to the house? Why had he risked
himself on the scene of the murder? Unless--unless, indeed, his
mission were to learn what happened, and to warn his master!

The captain caught that in a moment, and, thrusting the servants on
one side, despatched three or four men on the instant to the Rue
Touchet, "_Pardieu!_" he exclaimed, wiping his forehead when they were
gone, "I was nearly forgetting him. The villain! I will be sworn he
tempted her! But now I think I have netted all--madame, the maid, the
man, the devil!" He ticked them off on his fingers. "There is only the
lad wanting. The odds are they will get him, too, in the Rue Touchet.
So far, so good. But it is hateful work," the old soldier continued,
with an oath, looking askance at the group which surrounded madame and
the doctor. "They will--ugh! it is horrible. It would be a mercy to
give her a dose now, and end all."

But there was no one to take the responsibility, and so the few who
were abroad very early that morning saw a strange and mournful
procession pass through the streets of Paris; those streets which have
seen so many grisly and so many fantastic things. An hour before
daybreak a litter, surrounded by a crowd of armed men, some bearing
torches and some pikes and halberds, came out of the Hotel Vidoche and
passed slowly down the Rue St. Denis. The night was at its darkest,
the wind at its keenest. Vagrant wretches, lying out in the Halles,
rose up and walked for their lives, or slowly froze and perished.

But there are worse things than death in the open; worse, at any rate,
than that death which comes with kindly numbing power. And some of
these knew it; nay, all. The poorest outcast whom the glare of the
cressets surprised as he lurked in porch or penthouse, the leanest
beggar who looked out startled by the clang and tramp, knew himself
happier than the king's prisoner bound for the Chtelet; and, hugging
his rags, thanked Heaven for it.




                            CHAPTER VIII.

                          THE MARK OF CAIN.


When Jehan, in a fever of indignation, slipped stealthily out of the
house in the Rue Touchet and sped up the dark, quiet street after
Madame de Vidoche, he had no subtler purpose in his mind than to
overtake her and warn her. The lady had spoken kindly to him on the
night of the supper at Les Andelys. She was young, weak, oppressed;
the plot against her seemed to the child to be fiendish in its
artfulness. It needed no more to rouse every chivalrous instinct in
his nature--and these in a boy should be many, or woe betide the
man--and determine him to save her.

He thought that if he could overtake her and warn her all would be
well; and at first his purpose went no farther than that. But as he
ran, now looking over his shoulder in terror, and now peering into the
darkness ahead, sometimes slipping into the gutter in his haste, and
sometimes stumbling over a projecting step, a new and whimsical
thought flashed into his mind, and in a moment fascinated him. How it
came to one so young, whether the astrologer's duplicity, to which he
had been a witness, suggested it, or it sprang from some precocious
aptitude in the boy's own nature, it is impossible to say. But on a
sudden there it was in his mind, full-grown, full-armed, a perfect
scheme. He had only a few minutes in which to consider it before he
caught madame up, and the time to put it into execution came; but in
that interval he found no flaw in it. Rather he revelled in it. It
satisfied the boy's stern sense of retribution and justice. It more
than satisfied the boy's love of mischief and trickery.

He felt not the slightest misgiving, therefore, when it came to
playing his part. He went through it without pity, without a scruple
or thought of responsibility--nay, he followed madame home, and hid
himself behind the curtain, with no feeling of apprehension as to what
was coming, with no qualms of conscience.

But when he had seen all, and lying spell-bound in his hiding-place
had witnessed the tragedy, when covering his ears with his hands,
and cowering down as if he would cower through the floor, he had
heard Vidoche's death-cry and winced at each syllable of madame's
heart-broken utterance--when, with quaking limbs and white cheeks, he
had crept at last down the stairs and fled from the accursed house,
then the boy knew all; knew what he had done, and was horror-stricken!
Even the darkness and freezing cold were welcome, if he might escape
from that house--if he might leave those haunting cries behind. But
how? by what road? He fled through street after street, alley after
alley, over bridges, and along quays, by the doors of churches and the
gates of prisons. But everywhere the sights and sounds went with him,
forestalled him, followed him. He could not forget. When at last,
utterly exhausted, he flung himself down on a pile of refuse in a
distant corner of the Halles, his heart seemed bursting. He had killed
a man. He had worse than killed a woman. He would be hung. The
astrologer had told him truly; he was doomed, given up to evil and the
devil!

He lay for a long time panting and shuddering, with his face hidden;
while a burst of agony, provoked by some sudden pang of remembrance,
now and again racked his frame. The spot he had, almost unconsciously,
chosen for his hiding-place was a corner between two stalls, at the
east end of the market: an angle well sheltered from the wind, and
piled breast-high with porters' knots and rubbish. The air was a
little less bitter there than outside; and by good fortune he had
thrown himself down on an old sack, which he, by-and-bye, drew over
him. Otherwise he must have perished. As it was, he presently sobbed
himself into an uneasy slumber; but only to awake in a few minutes
with a scream of affright and a dismal return of all his
apprehensions.

Still, nature was already at work to console him; and misery sleeps
proverbially well. After a time he dozed again for a few minutes, and
then again. At length, a little before daybreak, he went off into a
sounder sleep, from which he did not awake until the wintry sun was
nearly an hour up, and old-fashioned people were thinking of dinner.

After opening his eyes, he lay a while between sleeping and waking,
with the sense of some unknown trouble heavy upon him. On a sudden a
voice, a harsh, rasping voice, speaking a strange clipped jargon,
roused him effectually. "He is a runaway!" the voice said, with two or
three unnecessary oaths. "A crown to a penny on it, my bully-boys!
Well, it is an ill-wind blows no one any good. Rouse up the little
shaveling, will you? That is not the way! Here, lend it me."

The next moment the boy sat up, with a cry of pain, for a heavy
porter's knot fell on his shin-bone and nearly broke it. He found
himself confronted by three or four grinning ruffians, whose eyes
glistened as they scanned his velvet clothes and the little silver
buttons that fastened them. The man who had spoken before seemed to be
the leader of the party: a filthy beggar with one arm and a hare-lip.
"Ho! ho!" he chuckled; "so you can feel, M. le Marquis, can you! Flesh
and blood like other folk. And doubtless with money in your pockets to
pay for your night's lodging."

He hauled the child to him and passed his hands through his clothes.
But he found nothing, and his face grew dark. "_Morbleu!_" he swore.
"The little softy has brought nothing away with him!"

The other men, gathering round, glared at the boy hungrily. In the
middle of the Forest of Bondy he could not have been more at their
mercy than he was in this quiet corner of the market, where a velvet
coat with silver buttons was as rare a sight as a piece of the true
cross. Two or three houseless wretches looked on from their frowsy
lairs under the stalls, but no one dreamed of interfering with the men
in possession. As for the boy, he gazed at his captors stolidly; he
was white, mute, apathetic.

"Plague, if I don't think the lad is a softy!" said one, staring at
him.

"Not he!" replied the man who had hold of him. And roughly seizing the
boy by the head with his huge hand, he forced up an eyelid with his
finger as if to examine the eye. The boy uttered a cry of pain.
"There!" said the ruffian, grinning with triumph. "He is all right.
The question is, what shall we do with him?"

"There are his clothes," one muttered, eyeing the boy greedily.

"To be sure, there are always his clothes," was the answer. "It does
not take an Armand Jean du Plessis de Richelieu to see that, gaby!
And, of course, they would melt to the tune of something apiece! But
maybe we can do better than that with him. He has run away. You don't
find truffles on the dung-hill every day."

"Well," said his duller fellows, their eyes beginning to sparkle with
greed, "what then, Bec de Livre?"

"If we take him home again, honest market porters, why should we not
be rewarded? Eh, my bully-boys?"

"That is a bright idea!" said one. So said another. The rest nodded.
"Ask him where he lives, when he is at home."

They did. But Jehan remained mute. "Twist his arm!" said the last
speaker. "He will soon tell you. Or stick your finger in his eye
again! Blest if I don't think the kid _is_ dumb!" the man continued,
gazing with astonishment at the boy's dull face and lack-lustre eyes.

"I think I shall find a tongue for him," the former operator replied
with a leer. "Here, sonny, answer before you are hurt, will you? Where
do you live?"

But Jehan remained silent. The ruffian raised his hand. In another
moment it would have fallen, but in the nick of time came an
interruption. "Nom de ma mre!" someone close at hand cried, in a
voice of astonishment. "It is my Jehan!"

Two of the party in possession turned savagely on the intruder--a
middle-sized man with foxy eyes, and a half-starved ape on his
shoulder. "Who asked you to speak?" snarled one. "Begone about your
business, my fine fellow, or I shall be making a hole in you!" cried
another.

"But he is my boy!" the new-comer answered, fairly trembling with joy
and astonishment. "He is my boy!"

"Your boy?" cried Bec de Livre, in a tone of contempt. "You look like
it, don't you? You look as if you dined on gold plate every day and
had a Rohan to your cup-bearer, you do! Go along, man; don't try to
bamboozle us, or it will be the worse for you!" And with an angry
scowl he turned to his victim.

But the showman, though he was a coward, was not to be put down so
easily. "It is the boy who is bamboozling you!" he said. "You take him
for a swell! It is only his show dress he has on. He is a tumbler's
boy, I tell you. He circled the pole with me for two years. Last
November he ran away. If you do not believe me, ask the monkey. See,
the monkey knows him."

Bec de Livre had to acknowledge that the monkey did know him. For the
poor beast was no sooner brought close to its old playmate than it
sprang upon him and covered him with caresses, gibbering and crying
out the while after so human a fashion that it might well have moved
hearts less hard. The boy did not return its endearments, however; but
a look of intelligence came into his eyes, and on a sudden he heaved a
sigh as if his heart was breaking.

The men who had taken possession of him looked at one another. "It was
the boy's cursed clothes fooled us," Bec de Livre growled savagely.
"We will have them, at any rate. Strip him and have done with it. And
do you keep off, Master Tumbler, or we will tumble you."

But when the showman, who was trembling with delight and anticipation,
made them understand that he would give a crown for the boy as he was
in his clothes--"and that is more than the fence will give you," he
added--they began to see reason. True, they stood out for a while for
a higher price; but the bargain was eventually struck at a crown and a
livre, and the boy handed over.

Master Crafty Eyes' hand shook as he laid it on the child's collar and
turned him round so that he might see his face the better. Bec de
Livre discerned the man's excitement, and looked at him curiously.
"You must be very fond of the lad," he said.

The showman's eyes glittered ferociously. "So fond of him," he said,
in a mocking tone, "that when I get him home I shall--oh, I shall not
hurt his fine clothes, or his face, or his little brown hands, for
those all show, and they are worth money to me. But I shall--I shall
put a poker in the fire, and then Master Jehan will take off his new
clothes so that they may not be singed, and--I shall teach him several
new tricks with the poker."

"You are a queer one," the other answered. "I'll be shot if you don't
look like a man with a good dinner before him."

"That is the man I am," the showman answered, a hideous smile
distorting his face. "I have gone without dinner or supper many a day
because my little friend here chose to run away one fine night, when
he was on the point of making my fortune. But I am going to dine now.
I am going to feed--on him!"

"Well, every man to his liking," the hare-lipped beggar answered
indifferently. "You have paid for your dinner, and may cook it as you
please, for me."

"I am going to," the showman answered, with an ugly look. He plucked
the boy almost off his feet as he spoke, and while the men cried after
him "_Bon apptit!_" and jeered, dragged him away across the open part
of the market; finally disappearing with him in one of the noisome
alleys which then led out of the Halles on the east side.

His way lay through a rabbit-warren of beetling passages and narrow
lanes, where the boy, once loose, could have dodged him a hundred ways
and escaped; and he held him with the utmost precaution, expecting him
every moment to make a desperate attempt at it. But Jehan was not the
old Jehan who had turned and twisted, walked and frolicked on the
rope, and in the utmost depths of ill-treatment had still kept teeth
to bite and spirit to use them. He was benumbed body and soul. He had
had no food for nearly twenty hours. He had passed the night exposed
to the cold. He had gone through intense excitement, horror, despair.
So he stumbled along, with Vidoche's dying cries in his ears, and,
famished, frozen, bemused, met the showman's threats with a face of
fixed, impassive apathy. He was within a very little of madness.

For a time Crafty Eyes did not heed this strange impassiveness. The
showman's fancy was busy with the punishment he would inflict when he
got the boy home to his miserable room. He gloated in anticipation
over the tortures he would contrive, and the care he would take that
they should not maim or disfigure the boy. When he had him tied down,
and the door locked, and the poker heated--ah! how he would enjoy
himself! The ruffian licked his lips. His eyes sparkled with pleasure.
He jerked the boy along in his hideous impatience.

But after a time the child's bearing began to annoy him. He stopped
and, holding him with one hand, beat him brutally on the head with the
other, until the boy fell and hung in his grasp. Then he dragged him
up roughly and hauled him on with volleys of oaths; still scowling at
him from time to time, as if, somehow, he found this little foretaste
of vengeance less satisfying than he had expected.

There were people coming and going in the dark filthy lane where this
happened--a place where smoke-grimed gables almost met overhead, and
the gutter was choked with refuse--but no one interfered. What was a
little beating more or less? Or, for the matter of that, what was a
boy more or less? The hulking loafers and frowsy slatterns, who
huddled for warmth in corners, nodded their heads and looked on
approvingly. They had their own brats to beat and business to mind.
There was no one to take the boy's part. And another hundred yards
would lodge him in the showman's garret.

At that last moment the boy awoke from his trance and understood; and
in a convulsion of fear hung back and struggled, screaming and
throwing himself down. The man dragged him up savagely, and was in the
act of taking him up bodily to carry him, when a person, who had
already passed the pair once, came back and looked at the boy again.
The next moment a hand fell on the showman's arm, and a voice said,
"Stop! What boy is that?"

The showman looked up, saw that the intervener was a priest, and
sneered. "What is that to you, father?" he said, trying by a side
movement to pass by. "Not one of your flock, at any rate."

"No, but you are!" the priest retorted in a strangely sonorous voice.
He was a stalwart man, with a mobile face and sad eyes that seemed out
of keeping with the rest of him. "You are! And if you do not this
minute set him down and answer my question, you ruffian, when your
time comes you shall go to the tree alone!"

"Diable!" the showman muttered, startled yet scowling. "Who are you,
then?"

"I am Father Bernard. Now tell me about that boy, and truly. What have
you been doing to him? Ay, you may well tremble, rascal!"

For the showman was trembling. In the Paris of that day the name of
Father Bernard was almost as well known as the name of Cardinal
Richelieu. There was not a night-prowler or cutpurse, bully or
swindler, who did not know it, and dream in his low fits, when the
drink was out and the money spent, of the day when he would travel by
Father Bernard's side to Montfaucon, and find no other voice and no
other eye to pity him in his trouble. Impelled by feelings of
humanity, rare at that time, this man made it his life-work to attend
on all who were cast for execution; to wait on them in prison, and be
with them at the last, and by his presence and words of comfort to
alleviate their sufferings here, and bring them to a better mind. He
had become so well known in this course of work that the king himself
did him honour, and the Cardinal granted him special rights. The mob
also. The priest passed unharmed through the lowest wynds of Paris,
and penetrated habitually to places where the Lieutenant of the
Chtelet, with a dozen pikes at his back, would not have been safe for
a moment.

This was the man whose stern voice brought the showman to a
standstill. Master Crafty Eyes faltered. Then he remembered that the
boy was his boy, that his title to him was good. He said so sulkily.

"Your boy?" the priest replied, frowning. "Who are you, then?"

"An acrobat, father."

"So I thought. But do acrobats' boys wear black velvet clothes with
silver buttons?"

"He was stolen from me," the showman answered eagerly. He had a good
conscience as to the clothes. "I have only just recovered him,
father."

"Who stole him? Where has he been?" The priest spoke quickly, and with
no little excitement. He looked narrowly at the boy the while, holding
him at arm's length. "Where did he spend last night, for instance?"

The showman spread out his palms and shrugged his shoulders. "How
should I know?" he said. "I was not with him."

"He has black hair and blue eyes!"

"Yes. But what of that?" Crafty Eyes answered. "I can swear to him. He
is my boy."

"And mine!" Father Bernard retorted with energy. "The boy I want!" The
priest's eyes sparkled, his form seemed to dilate with triumph. "Deo
laus! Deo laus!" he murmured sonorously, so that a score of loiterers
who had gathered round, and were staring and shivering by turns, fell
back affrighted and crossed themselves. "He is the boy! God has put
him in my way this day as clearly as if an angel had led me by the
hand. And he goes with me; he goes with me. Chut, man!"--this to the
showman, who stood frowning in his path--"don't dare to look black at
me. The boy goes with me, I say. I want him for a purpose. If you
choose you can come too."

"Whither?"

"To the Chtelet," Father Bernard answered, with a grim chuckle. "You
don't seem to relish the idea. But do as you please."

"You will take the boy?"

"This moment," the priest answered.

"_Mon Dieu!_ but you shall not!" the showman exclaimed. Wrath for the
moment drove out fear. He seized the child by the arm. "He is my boy!
You shall not, I say!" he cried, almost foaming with rage. "He is
mine!"


[Illustration: "'WHO STOLE HIM? WHERE HAS HE BEEN?'" (_p_. 169).]


"Idiot! Beast! Gallows-bird!" the priest thundered in reply. "For
one-half of a denier I would throw you into the next street! Let go,
or I will blast you with--Oh, it is well for you you are reasonable.
Now begone! Begone! or, at a word from me, there are a score here
will----"

He did not finish his sentence, for the showman fell back
panic-stricken, and stood off among the crowd, malevolence and craven
fear struggling for the mastery in his countenance. The priest took
the boy up gently in his arms and looked at him. His face grew
strangely mild as he did so. The black brows grew smooth, the lips
relaxed. "Get a little water," he said to the nearest man, a hulking,
olive-skinned Southerner. "The child has swooned."

"Your pardon, father," the man answered. "He is dead."

But Father Bernard shook his head. "No, my son," he said kindly. "He
who led me here to-day will keep life in him a little longer. God's
ways never end in a _cul-de-sac_. Get the water. He has swooned only."




                             CHAPTER IX.

                          BEFORE THE COURT.


Since the poisoning of the Prince of Cond by his servant, Brillaut,
at the instigation--as was alleged and commonly believed--of Madame la
Princesse, no tragedy of the kind had caused a greater sensation in
Paris, or been the subject of more talk, than the murder of M. de
Vidoche. The remarkable circumstances which attended it--and which
lost nothing in the narration--its immediate discovery, the apparent
lack of motive, and the wealth, rank, and youth of the guilty wife,
all helped, with the fulness of Paris at this time and the absence of
any stirring political news, to make it the one topic of interest.
Nothing else was talked of in chamber or tennis court, in the Grand
Gallery at the Louvre, or in the cardinal's ante-room at the Palais
Richelieu. Culprit and victim were alike well known. M. de Vidoche, if
no favourite, had been at least a conspicuous figure in society. He
had been cast for one of the parts in the royal troupe at the
Christmas carnival. His flirtation with Mademoiselle de Farincourt had
been sufficiently marked to cause both amusement and interest. And if
madame was a less familiar figure at Court, if she had a reputation
somewhat prudish, and an air of rusticity that did not belie it, and
was even less of a favourite than her husband, her position as a great
heiress and the last of an old family gave her a _cachet_ which did
not fail to make her interesting now.

Gladly would the great ladies in their coaches have gone down to the
Chtelet to stare at her after the cruel fashion of that day; and,
after buzzing round her in her misery, have gone away with a hundred
tales of how she looked, and what she wore, and what she said in
prison. But madame was saved this--this torture worse than the
question--by the physician's order that no one should be admitted to
her. He laid this down so strenuously--telling the lieutenant that if
she had not complete repose for twenty-four hours he would be
answerable neither for her life nor her reason--that that officer,
who, like the Chevalier du Guet, was an old soldier, replied "No" to
the most pressing insistences; and save and except Father Bernard, who
had the _entre_ at all hours by the king's command, would let no one
go in to her. "It will be bad enough by-and-bye," he said, with an
oath. "If she did it, she will be punished. But she shall have a
little peace to-day."

But the great world, baffled on this point, grew only the more
curious; circulated stories only the more outrageous; and nodded and
winked and whispered only the more assiduously. Would she be put to
the question? And by the rack, or the boot, or the water torture? And
who was the man? Of course there was a man. Now if it had been M. de
Vidoche who had poisoned her, that would have been plain,
intelligible, perspicuous; since everyone knew--and so on, and so on,
with Mademoiselle de Farincourt's name at intervals.

It was believed that madame would be first examined in private; but
late at night, on the day before Christmas Eve, a sealed order came to
the Lieutenant of the Chtelet, commanding him to present madame, with
her servants and all concerned in the case, at the Palais de Justice
on the following morning. Late as it was, the news was known in every
part of Paris that night. Marshal Bassompierre, lying in the Bastille,
heard it, and regretted he could not see the sight. It was rumoured
that the king would attend in person; even that the trial had been
hastened for his pleasure. It was certain that half the Court would be
there, and the other half, if it could find room. The great ladies,
who had failed to storm the Chtelet, hoped to succeed better at the
Palais, and the First President of the Court, and even the
Commissioners appointed to sit with him, found their doors beset at
dawn with delicate "_poulets_," or urgent, importunate applications.

Madame de Vidoche, the man and maid, were brought from the Chtelet to
the Conciergerie an hour before daylight--madame in her coach, with
her woman, the man on foot. That cold morning ride was such as few,
thank God, are called on to endure. To the horrors of anticipation the
lost wife, scarcely more than a girl, had to add the misery of
retrospection; to the knowledge of what she had done, a woman's
shrinking from the doom that threatened her, from shame and pain and
death. But that which she felt perhaps as keenly as anything, as she
crouched in a corner of her curtained vehicle and heard the yells
which everywhere saluted its appearance, was the sudden sense of
loneliness and isolation. True, the Lieutenant sat opposite to her,
but his face was hard. She was no longer a woman to him, but a
prisoner, a murderess, a poisoner. And the streets were thronged, in
spite of the cold and the early hour. On the Pont au Change the people
ran beside the coach and strove to get a sight of her, and jeered and
sang and shouted. And at the entrance to the Palais, in the room in
the Conciergerie where she had to wait, on the staircase to the court
above, everywhere it was the same; all were set so thick with
faces--staring, curious faces--that the guards could scarcely make a
way for her. But she was cut off from all. She was no longer of
them--of things living. Not one said a kind word to her; not one
looked sympathy or pity. On a sudden, in a moment, with hundreds
gazing at her, she, a delicate woman, found herself a thing apart,
unclean, to be shunned. A thing, no longer a person. A prisoner, no
longer a woman.

They placed a seat for her, and she sank into it, feeling at first
nothing but the shame of being so stared at. But presently she had to
rise and be sworn, and then, as she became conscious of other things,
as the details of the crowded chamber forced themselves on her
attention, and she saw which were the judges, and heard herself called
upon to answer the questions that should be put to her, the instinct
of self-preservation, the desire to clear herself, to escape and live,
took hold of her. A late instinct, for hitherto all her thoughts had
been of the man she had killed--her husband; but the fiercer for that.
A burning flush suddenly flamed in her cheeks. Her eyes grew bright,
her heart began to beat quickly. She turned giddy.

She knew only of one way in which she could escape; only of one man
that could help her; and even while the first judge was in the act of
calling upon her, she turned from him and looked round. She looked to
the right, to the left, then behind her, for Ntredame. He, if he told
the truth, could clear her! He could say that she had come to him for
a charm, and not for poison! And he only! But where was he? There was
her woman, trembling and weeping, waiting to be called. There was the
valet, pale and frightened. There were twice a hundred indifferent
people. But Ntredame? He was not visible. He was not there. When she
had satisfied herself of this, she sank back with a moan of despair.
She gave up hope again. A hundred curious eyes saw the colour fade
from her cheeks; her eyes grew dull, the whole woman collapsed.

The examination began. She gave her name in a hollow whisper.

It was the practice of that day, and still is, in French courts, to
take advantage of any self-betrayal or emotion on the part of the
accused person. It is the duty of the judges to observe the prisoner
constantly and narrowly; and the First President, on an occasion such
as this, was not the man to overlook anything which was visible to the
ordinary spectator. Instead, therefore, of pursuing the regular
interrogatory he had in his mind, he leaned forward and asked madame
what was the matter.

"I wish for the man Solomon Ntredame," Madame de Vidoche answered,
rising and speaking in a choking voice.

"That is the man from whom you bought the poison, I think?" the judge
answered, affecting to look at his notes.

"Yes, but as a love-philtre--not a poison," madame said in a whisper.
"I wish him to be here."

"You wish to be confronted with him?"

"Yes."

"With the man Solomon Ntredame?"

"Yes."

"Then you shall be, presently," the judge replied, leaning back, and
casting a singular glance at his colleagues. "Be satisfied. And now,
madame," he continued gravely, as his eyes returned to her, "it is my
duty to help you to tell, and your duty to confess frankly, all that
you know concerning this matter. Be good enough, therefore, to collect
yourself, and answer my questions fully and truly, as you hope for
mercy here and hereafter. So you will save yourself pain, and such
also as shall examine you; and may best deserve, in the worst case,
the king's indulgence."

As he uttered this exhortation madame clung to the bar behind which
she stood, and seemed for the moment about to faint, so that the
President waited awhile before he proceeded. She looked, indeed,
ghostly. Her white face gleamed through the fog--which, rising from
the river, was fast filling the chamber--like a face seen for an
instant on a wreck through mist and spray and tempest. Ladies who had
known her as an equal, and who now gazed heartlessly down at her from
galleries, felt a pleasant thrill of excitement, and whispered that
they had not braved the early cold for nothing. There was not a man in
the court who did not expect to see her fall.

But there is in women a power of endurance far exceeding that of men.
By an immense effort madame regained control over herself. She
answered the President's opening questions faintly but clearly; and,
being led at once to tell of her visit to Ntredame, had sufficient
sense of her position to dwell plainly on the two facts important to
her--that the object of her visit was a love-potion, and not a poison,
and that the instructions first given to her were to take it herself.
The latter assertion produced a startling impression in the court. It
was completely unexpected; and though ninety-nine out of a hundred
fancied it the bold invention of a desperate woman, all allowed that
it added zest to the case.

Naturally the President pressed her hard on these points. He strove,
both by cajolery and by stating objections, to make her withdraw from
them. But she would not. Nor could he entrap her into narrating
anything at variance with them. At length he desisted. "Very well, we
will leave that," he said; and so subtly had her story gained sympathy
for her that the sigh of relief uttered in the court was perfectly
audible. "We will pass on, if you please. The boy who overtook you in
the street, and, as you say, altered all? Who was he, madame?"

"I do not know."

"You had seen him before?"

"No."

"Did he not open the door at this Ntredame's when you entered the
house?"

"No."

"Nor when you left?"

"No."

"How did you know, then, madame, that he came from this abominable
person whom you had been visiting?"

"He said he did."

"And do you tell us," the judge retorted, "that on the mere word of
this boy, whom you did not know and had never seen, without the
assurance of any token or countersign, you disregarded the man
Ntredame's directions on the most vital point, and, instead of taking
this drug yourself, gave it to your husband?"

"I do."

"Without suspecting that it was other than that for which you had
asked?"

"Yes."

"Madame," the judge said slowly, "it is incredible." He looked for a
moment at his colleagues, as if to collect their opinions. They
nodded. He turned to her again. "Do you not see that?" he said almost
kindly.

"I do not," madame answered firmly. "It is true."

"Describe the boy, if you please."

"He had--I think he had dark clothes," she answered, faltering for the
first time. "He looked about twelve years old."

"Yes," the President said; "go on."

"He had--I could not see any more," madame muttered faintly. "It was
dark."

"And do you expect us to believe this?" the President replied with
warmth, real or assumed. "Do you expect us to believe such a story? Or
that it was at the instance of this boy only--this boy of whom you
knew nothing, whom you cannot describe, whom you had never seen
before--that it was at his instance only that you gave this drug to
your husband, instead of taking it yourself?"

She reeled slightly, clinging to the bar. The court swam before her.
She saw, as he meant her to see, the full hopelessness of her
position, the full strength of the case which fate had made against
her, her impotence, her helplessness. Yet she forced herself to make
an effort. "It is the truth," she said, in a broken voice. "I loved
him."

"Ah!" the President replied cynically. He repressed by a gesture a
slight disturbance at the rear of the court. "That, of course. It is
part of the story. Or why a love-philtre? But do you not see, madame,"
he continued, bending his brows and speaking in the tone he used to
common criminals, "that all the wives in Paris might poison their
husbands, and when they were found out say 'It was a love-potion,' if
you are to escape? No, no; we must have some better tale than that."

She looked at him in terror and shame. "I have no other," she cried
wildly. "That is the truth. If you do not believe me, there is
Ntredame. Ask him."

"You applied to be confronted with him some time back," the President
answered, looking aside at his colleagues, who nodded. "Is that still
your desire?"

She murmured "Yes," with dry lips.

"Then let him be called," the judge answered solemnly. "Let Solomon
Ntredame be called and confronted with the accused."

The order was received with a general stir, a movement of curiosity
and expectation. Those in the galleries leaned forward to see the
better; those at the back stood up. Madame, with her lips parted and
her breath coming quickly--madame, the poor centre of all--gazed with
her soul in her eyes towards the door at which she saw others gazing.
All for her depended on this man--the man she was about to see. Would
he lie and accuse her? Or would he tell the truth and corroborate her
story--say, in a word, that she had come for a love-charm, and not for
poison? Surely this last? Surely it would be to his interest?

But while she gazed with her soul in her eyes, the door which had been
partly opened fell shut again, and disappointed her. At the same
moment there was a general movement and rustling round her, an
uprising in every part of the chamber. In bewilderment, almost in
impatience, she turned towards the judges and found that they had
risen too. Then through a door behind them she saw six gentlemen file
in, with a flash and sparkle of colour that lit up the sombre bench.
The first was the king.

Louis was about thirty-five years old at this time--a dark, sallow
man, wearing black, with a wide-leafed hat, in which a costly diamond
secured a plume of white feathers. He carried a walking cane, and
saluted the judges as he entered, Three gentlemen--two about the
king's age, the third a burly, soldierly man of sixty--followed him,
and took their places behind the canopied chair placed for him. The
fifth to enter--but he passed behind the judges and took a chair which
stood on their left--wore a red robe trimmed with fur, and a small red
cap. He was a man of middle height and pale complexion, keen Italian
features and bright piercing eyes, and so far was not remarkable. But
he had also a coal-black moustache and chin tuft, and milk-white hair;
and this contrast won him recognition everywhere. He was Armand Jean
du Plessis, Duke and Cardinal Richelieu, soldier, priest, and
playwriter, and for sixteen years the ruler of France.

Madame gazed at them with a beating heart, with wild hopes that would
rise, despite herself. But, oh God! how coldly their eyes met hers!
With what a stony stare! With what curiosity, indifference, contempt!
Alas, they had come for that. They had come to stare. This was their
Christmas show--part of their Christmas revels. And she--she was a
woman on her trial, a poisoner, a murderess, a vile thing to be
questioned, tortured, dragged to a shameful death!

For a moment or two the king talked with the judges. Then he sat back
in his chair. The President made a sign, and an usher in a sonorous
voice cried, "Solomon Ntredame! Let Solomon Ntredame stand forth!"




                              CHAPTER X.

                            TWO WITNESSES.


Madame de Vidoche heard the name and braced herself again, turning
towards the door as others turned, and waiting with dry lips and
feverish eyes for the man who was to save her--to save her in spite of
king and court. Would he never come? The door stood open, remained
open. She could see through it the passage with its bare walls and
dusky ceiling, and hear in the hushed silence a noise of shuffling
feet. Gradually the noise grew louder; though it still seemed a thing
by itself, and so distant that in the court where they waited, with
every eye expectant, the slightest sound, the lowest whisper was
audible. When the usher cried again, "Solomon Ntredame, stand
forward!" more than one glanced at him angrily. He balked their
expectation.

Ha! at last! But they were carrying him! Madame shivered slightly as
she watched the four men come slowly along the passage, bearing a
chair between them. At the door they stumbled and paused, giving her
time to think. They had been racking him, then, and he could not walk;
she might have guessed it. Her cheek, white before, became a shade
ghastlier, and she clutched the bar with a firmer grip.

They brought him slowly down the three steps and through the narrow
passage towards her. The men who carried him blocked her view, but she
saw presently that there was something odd about his head. When they
set him down, three paces from her, she saw what it was. His face was
covered. There was a loose cloth over his head, and he leaned forward
in a strange way.

What did it mean? She began to tremble, gazing at him wildly,
expecting she knew not what. And he did not move.


[Illustration: "THEY WERE CARRYING HIM" (_p_. 192).]


Suddenly the President's solemn voice broke the silence. "Madame," he
said--but it seemed to her that he was speaking a long way off--"here
is your witness. You asked to be confronted with him, and the court,
hoping that this may be the more merciful way of inducing you to
confess your crime, assent to the request. But I warn you that he is a
witness not for you, but against you. He has confessed."

For a moment she looked dumbly at the speaker; then her eyes went back
to the veiled figure in the chair--it had a horrible attraction for
her.

"Unhappy woman," the President continued, in solemn accents, "he has
confessed. Will you now, before you look upon him, do likewise?"

She shook her head. She would have denied, protested, cried that she
was not guilty; but her throat was parched--she had lost her voice,
hope, all. There was a drumming noise in the court; or perhaps it was
in her head. It was growing dark, too.

"He has confessed," she heard the President go on--but he was speaking
a long, long way off now, and his voice came to her ears dully--"by
executing on himself that punishment which otherwise the law would
have imposed. Are you still obstinate? Let the face be uncovered then.
Now, wretched woman, look on your accomplice."

Perhaps he spoke in mercy, and to prepare her; for she looked, and
did not at once swoon, though the sight of that dead yellow face, with
its stony eyes and open mouth, drew shrieks from more than one. The
self-poisoner had done his work well. The sombre features wore even in
death a cynical grin, the lips a smile of triumph. But this was on the
surface. In the glassy eyes, dull and lustreless, lurked--as all saw
who gazed closely--a horror; a look of sudden awakening, as if in the
moment of dissolution the wicked man had come face to face with
judgment; and, triumphant over his earthly foes, had met on the
threshold of the dark world a shape that froze the very marrow in his
bones.

Grimmest irony that he who had so long sported with the things of
death, and traded on men's fear of it, should himself be brought here
dead, to be exposed and gazed at! Of small use now his tricks and
chemicals, his dark knowledge and the mystery in which he had wrapped
himself. Orcus had him, grim head, black heart and all.

A moment, I have said, madame stared. Then gradually the truth, the
hideous truth, came home to her. He was dead! He had killed himself!
The horror of it overcame her at last. With a shuddering cry she fell
swooning to the floor.

When she came to herself again--after how long an interval she
could not tell--and the piled faces and sharp outlines of the court
began to shape themselves out of the mist, her first thought, as
remembrance returned, was of the ghastly figure in the chair. With an
effort--someone was sponging her forehead, and would have restrained
her--she turned her head and looked. To her relief it was gone. She
sighed, and closing her eyes lay for a time inert, hearing the hum of
voices, but paying no attention. But gradually the misery of her
position took hold of her again, and with a faint moan she looked up.

In a moment she fell to trembling and crying softly, for her eyes met
those of the woman who stooped over her and read there something new,
strange, wonderful--kindness. The woman patted her hand softly, and
murmured to her to be still and to listen. She was listening herself
between times, and presently madame followed her example.

Dull as her senses still were, she noticed that the king sat forward
with an odd keen look on his face, that the judges seemed startled,
that even the Cardinal's pale features were slightly flushed. And not
one of all had eyes for her. They were looking at a boy who stood at
the end of the table, beside a priest. The cold light from a window
fell full on his face, and he was speaking. "I listened," she heard
him say. "Yes."

"And how long a time elapsed before Madame de Vidoche came?" the
President asked, continuing, apparently, an examination of which she
had missed the first part.

"Half an hour, I think," the boy answered, in a clear, bold tone.

"You are sure it was poison he required?"

"I am sure."

"And madame?"

"A love-philtre."

"You heard both interviews?"

"Both."

"You are sure of the arrangement made between Vidoche and this man, of
which you have told us? That the poison should be given to madame in
the form of a love-philtre? That she might take it herself?"

"I am sure."

"And it was you who ran after Madame de Vidoche and told her that the
draught was to be given to her husband instead?"

"Yes."

"Do you acknowledge, then," the President continued slowly, "that it
was you who, in fact, killed M. de Vidoche?"

For the first time the boy faltered and stumbled, and looked this way
and that as if for a chance of escape. But there was none, and Father
Bernard, by laying his hand on his arm, seemed to give him courage. "I
do," he answered, in a low tone.

"Why?" the President demanded, with a quick look at his colleagues. He
spoke amid an irrepressible murmur of interest. The tale had been told
once, but it was a tale that bore telling.

"Because--I heard him plan his wife's death--and I thought it right,"
the boy stammered, terror growing in his eyes. "I wanted to save her.
I did not know. I did not think."

The President looked towards the king, but suddenly from an unexpected
quarter came an interruption. Madame rose trembling to her feet and
stood grasping the bar before her. Her face passed from white to red,
and red to white. Her eyes glittered through her tears. The woman
beside her would have held her back, but she would not be restrained.
"What is this?" she panted. "Does he say that my husband was--there?"

"Yes, madame, he does," the President answered indulgently.

"And that he came for poison--for me?"

"He says so, madame."

She looked at him for a moment wildly, then sank back on her stool and
began to sob. She had gone through so many emotions; love and death,
shame and fear, had so sported with her during the last few days that
she could taste nothing to the full now, neither sweet nor bitter. As
the dawning of life and hope had left her rather dazed than thankful,
so this stab, that a little earlier would have pierced her very
heartstrings, did but prick her. Afterwards the thankfulness and the
pain--and the healing--might come. But here in the presence of all
these people, where so much had happened to her, she could only sob
weakly.

The President turned again to the king. Louis nodded, and with a
painful effort--for he stammered terribly--spoke. "Who is th-this
lad?" he said. "Ask him."

The judge bowed and returned to the witness. "You call yourself Jean
de Bault?" he said somewhat roughly. The name, and especially the
particle, displeased him.

The boy assented.

"Who are you, then?"

Jehan opened his mouth to answer, but Father Bernard interposed. "Tell
His Majesty," he said, "what you told me."

After a moment's hesitation the boy complied, speaking fast, with his
face on his breast and a flushed cheek. Nevertheless, in the silence
every word reached the ear. "I am Jehan de Bault," he pattered in his
treble voice, "seigneur of I know not where, and lord of seventeen
lordships in the county of Perigord----" and so on, and so on, through
the quaint formula to which we have listened more than once.

Ninety-nine out of a hundred who heard him, heard him with incredulous
surprise, and took the tale for a mountebank's patter; though patter,
they acknowledged it was of a novel kind, aptly made and well spoken.
Two or three of the bolder laughed. There had been little to laugh at
before. The king moved restlessly in his chair, saying, "Pish! Wh-hat
is this rubbish? What is he s-saying?"

The President frowned, and taking his cue from the king, was about to
rebuke the boy sharply, when one who had not before spoken, but whose
voice in an instant produced silence among high and low, intervened.
"The tale rings true!" the Cardinal said, in low, suave accents. "But
there is no family of Bault in Perigord, is there?"

"With His Majesty's permission, no!" replied a bluff, hearty voice;
and therewith the elderly soldier who had come in with the king
advanced a pace to the side of his master's chair. "I am of Perigord,
and know, your Eminence," he continued. "More. Two months ago I saw
this lad--I recognise him now--at the fair of Fcamp. He was
differently dressed then, but he had the same tale, except that he did
not mention Perigord."

"S-someone has taught it him," said the king.

"Your Majesty is doubtless right," the President answered
obsequiously. Then to the boy he continued, "Speak, boy; who taught it
you?"

But Jehan only shook his head and looked puzzled. At last, being
pressed, he said, "At Bault, in Perigord."

"There is no such place!" M. de Bresly cried roundly.

Father Bernard looked distressed. He began to repent that he had led
the child to tell the tale; he began to fear that it might hurt
instead of helping. Perhaps after all he had been too credulous. But
again the Cardinal came to the rescue.

"Is there any family in Perigord can boast of three marshals, M. de
Bresly?" he asked, in his thin incisive tones.

"None that I know of. Several that can boast of two."

"The blood of Roland?"

M. de Bresly shrugged his shoulders. "It is common to all of us," he
said, smiling.

The great Cardinal smiled, too--a flickering, quickly-passing smile.
Then he leaned forward and fixed the boy with his fierce black eyes.
"What was your father's name?" he said.

Jehan shook his head, impotently, miserably.

"Where did you live?"

The same result. The king threw himself back and muttered, "It is no
good." The President moved in his seat. Some in the galleries began to
whisper.

But the Cardinal raised his hand imperiously. "Can you read?" he said.

"No," Jehan murmured.

"Then your arms?" The Cardinal spoke rapidly now, and his face was
growing hard. "They were over the gate, over the door, over the
fireplace. Think--look back--reflect. What were they?"

For a moment. Jehan stared at him in bewilderment, flinching under the
gaze of those piercing eyes. Then on a sudden the boy's face grew
crimson. He raised his hand eagerly. "_Or, on a mount vert!_" he cried
impetuously--and stopped. But presently, in a different voice, he
added slowly, "It was a tree--on a hill."

With a swift look of triumph the Cardinal turned to M. de Bresly.
"Now," he said, "that belongs to----"

The soldier nodded almost sulkily. "It is Madame de Vidoche's," he
said.

"And her name was----"

"Martinbault. Mademoiselle de Martinbault!"

A murmur of astonishment rose from every part of the court. For a
moment the King, the Cardinal, the President, M. de Bresly, all were
inaudible. The air seemed full of exclamations, questions, answers; it
rang with the words, "Bault--Martinbault!" Everywhere people rose to
see the boy, or craned forward and slipped with a clattering noise.
Etiquette, reverence, even the presence of the king, went for nothing
in the rush of excitement. It was long before the ushers could obtain
silence, or any get a hearing.

Then M. de Bresly, who looked as much excited as any, and as red in
the face, was found to be speaking. "Pardieu, sire, it may be so!" he
was heard to say. "It is true enough, as I now remember. A child was
lost in that family about eight years back. But it was at the time of
the Rochelle expedition; the province was full of trouble, and M. and
Madame de Martinbault were just dead; and little was made of it. All
the same, this may be the boy. Nay, it is a thousand to one he is!"

"What is he, then, to M--Madame de V--Vidoche?" the king asked, with
an effort. He was vastly excited--for him.

"A brother, sire," M. de Bresly answered.

That word pierced at last through the dulness which wrapped madame's
faculties, and had made her impervious to all that had gone before.
She rose slowly, listened, looked at the boy---looked with growing
wonder, like one awakening from a dream. Possibly in that moment the
later years fell from her, and she saw herself again a child--a tall,
lanky girl playing in the garden of the old chteau with a little
toddling boy who ran and lisped, beat her sturdily with fat, bare arms
or cuddled to her for kisses. For with a sudden gesture she stretched
out her hands, and cried in a clear voice, "Jean! Jean! It is little
Jean!"

                          *   *   *   *   *

It became the fashion--a fashion which lasted half a dozen years at
least--to call that Christmas the Martinbault Christmas; so loudly did
those who were present at that famous examination, and the discovery
which attended it, profess that it exceeded all the other amusements
of the year, not excepting even the great ball at the Palais Cardinal,
from which every lady carried off an _trenne_ worth a year's
pin-money. The story became the rage. Those who had been present drove
their friends, who had not been so fortunate, to the verge of madness.
From the court the tale spread to the markets. Men made a broadsheet
of it, and sold it in the streets--in the Rue Touchet, and under the
gallows at Montfaucon, where the body of Solomon Ntredame withered in
the spring rains. Had Madame de Vidoche and the child stayed in Paris,
it must have offended their ears ten times a day.


[Illustration: "A MAN HALF-NAKED ... CRAWLED ON TO THE HIGHROAD" (_p_.
212).]


But they did not. As soon as madame could be moved, she retired with
the boy to the old house four leagues from Perigueux, and there, in
the quiet land where the name of Martinbault ranked with the name of
the king, she sought to forget her married life. She took her maiden
title, and in the boy's breeding, in works of mercy, in a hundred
noble and fitting duties entirely to her taste, succeeded in finding
peace, and presently happiness. But one thing neither time, nor
change, nor in the event love, could erase from her mind; and that was
a deep-seated dread of the great city in which she had suffered so
much. She never returned to Paris.

About a year after the trial a man with crafty, foxy eyes came
wandering through Perigueux, with a monkey on his shoulder. He saw not
far from the road--as his evil-star would have it--an old chteau
standing low among trees. The place promised well, and he went to it
and began to perform before the servants in the courtyard. Presently
the lord of the house, a young boy, came out to see him.

More need not be said, save that an hour later a man, half naked,
covered with duckweed, and aching in every bone, crawled on to the
highroad, and went on his way in sadness--with his mouth full of
curses; and that for years afterwards a monkey, answering to the name
of Taras, teased the dogs, and plucked the ivy, and gambolled at will
on the great south terrace at Martinbault.




                               THE END.





                          *   *   *   *   *
Printed by Cassell & Company, Limited. La Belle Sauvage, London, E.C.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Man in Black, by Stanley J. Weyman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAN IN BLACK ***

***** This file should be named 39295-8.txt or 39295-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/2/9/39295/

Produced by Charles Bowen, from page scans provided by the
Web Archive (University of Toronto)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
Project Gutenberg's The Story of Francis Cludde, by Stanley J. Weyman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Story of Francis Cludde

Author: Stanley J. Weyman

Release Date: March 29, 2012 [EBook #39296]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF FRANCIS CLUDDE ***




Produced by Charles Bowen, from page scans provided by the
Web Archive (University of California Libraries)











Transcriber's Notes:

   1. Page scan source:
      http://www.archive.org/details/storyoffranciscl00weymiala
      (University of California Libraries)

   2. The diphthong oe is represented by [oe].







                     THE STORY OF FRANCIS CLUDDE






                         BY STANLEY J. WEYMAN

                              *   *   *

THE HOUSE OF THE WOLF. A Romance. With Frontispiece and Vignette.
Crown 8vo, cloth, $1.25.

THE STORY OF FRANCIS CLUDDE. A Romance. With four Illustrations. Crown
8vo, $1.25.

A GENTLEMAN OF FRANCE. Being the Memoirs of Gaston de Bonne, Sieur de
Marsac. With Frontispiece and Vignette. Crown 8vo, cloth, $1.25.

UNDER THE RED ROBE. With twelve full-page Illustrations. Crown 8vo,
cloth, $1.25.

MY LADY ROTHA. A Romance of the Thirty Years' War. With eight
Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth, $1.25.

FROM THE MEMOIRS OF A MINISTER OF FRANCE. With thirty-six
Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth, $1.25.

SHREWSBURY. A Romance. With twenty-four illustrations. Crown 8vo,
$1.50.

THE RED COCKADE. A Novel. With 48 illustrations by R. Caton Woodville.
Crown 8vo, $1.50.

                              *   *   *

                  New York: Longmans, Green, and Co.






                              THE STORY

                                  OF

                            FRANCIS CLUDDE




                                  BY

                          STANLEY J. WEYMAN

       AUTHOR OF "A GENTLEMAN OF FRANCE," "UNDER THE RED ROBE,"
                     "MY LADY ROTHA," ETC., ETC.




_ILLUSTRATED_




                               NEW YORK
                       LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.
                                 1898






                         Copyright, 1891, by
                      CASSELL PUBLISHING COMPANY

                              *   *   *

                         Copyright, 1897, by
                       LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.

                        _All rights reserved_





                              CONTENTS.


    CHAPTER

         I. "H, Sire Ane, H,"

        II. In the Bishop's Room,

       III. "Down with Purveyors!"

        IV. Two Sisters of Mercy,

         V. Mistress Bertram,

        VI. Master Clarence,

       VII. On Board the "Framlingham,"

      VIII. A House of Peace,

        IX. Playing with Fire,

         X. The Face in the Porch,

        XI. A Foul Blow,

       XII. Anne's Petition,

      XIII. A Willful Man's Way,

       XIV. At Bay in the Gatehouse,

        XV. Before the Court,

       XVI. In the Duke's Name,

      XVII. A Letter that had Many Escapes,

     XVIII. The Witch's Warning

       XIX. Ferdinand Cludde,

        XX. The Coming Queen,

       XXI. My Father,

      XXII. Sir Anthony's Purpose,

     XXIII. The Last Mass,

      XXIV. Awaiting the Blow,

       XXV. In Harbor at Last,





                     THE STORY OF FRANCIS CLUDDE.




                              CHAPTER I.

                         "H, SIRE ANE, H!"


On the boundary line between the two counties of Warwick and Worcester
there is a road very famous in those parts, and called the Ridgeway.
Father Carey used to say--and no better Latinist could be found for a
score of miles round in the times of which I write--that it was made
by the Romans. It runs north and south along the narrow spine of the
country, which is spread out on either side like a map, or a picture.
As you fare southward you see on your right hand the green orchards
and pastures of Worcestershire stretching as far as the Malvern Hills.
You have in front of you Bredon Hill, which is a wonderful hill, for
if a man goes down the Avon by boat it goes with him--now before, and
now behind--a whole day's journey--and then stands in the same place.
And on the left hand you have the great Forest of Arden, and not much
besides, except oak trees, which grow well in Warwickshire.

I describe this road, firstly, because it is a notable one, and forty
years ago was the only Queen's highway, to call a highway, in that
country. The rest were mere horse-tracks. Secondly, because the chase
wall of Coton End runs along the side of it for two good miles; and
the Cluddes--I am Francis Cludde--have lived at Coton End by the
Ridgeway time out of mind, probably--for the name smacks of the
soil--before the Romans made the road. And thirdly, because forty
years ago, on a drizzling February day in 1555--second year of Mary,
old religion just reestablished--a number of people were collected on
this road, forming a group of a score or more, who stood in an ordered
kind of disorder about my uncle's gates and looked all one way, as if
expecting an arrival, and an arrival of consequence.

First, there was my uncle Sir Anthony, tall and lean. He wore his best
black velvet doublet and cloak, and had put them on with an air of
huge importance. This increased each time he turned, staff in hand,
and surveyed his following, and as regularly gave place to a "Pshaw!"
of vexation and a petulant glance when his eye rested on me. Close
beside him, looking important too, but anxious and a little frightened
as well, stood good Father Carey. The priest wore his silk cassock,
and his lips moved from time to time without sound, as though he
were trying over a Latin oration--which, indeed, was the fact. At a
more respectful distance were ranged Baldwin Moor, the steward,
and a dozen servants; while still farther away lounged as many
ragamuffins--landless men, who swarmed about every gentleman's door
in those times, and took toll of such abbey lands as the king might
have given him. Against one of the stone gate-pillars I leaned
myself--nineteen years and six months old, and none too wise, though
well grown, and as strong as one here and there. And perched on the
top of the twin post, with his chin on his knees, and his hands
clasped about them, was Martin Luther, the fool.

Martin had chosen this elevated position partly out of curiosity, and
partly, perhaps, under a strong sense of duty. He knew that, whether
he would or no, he must needs look funny up there. His nose was red,
and his eyes were running, and his teeth chattering; and he did look
funny. But as he felt the cold most his patience failed first. The
steady, silent drizzle, the mist creeping about the stems of the oak
trees, the leaden sky proved too much for him in the end. "A watched
pot never boils!" he grumbled.

"Silence, sirrah!" commanded my uncle angrily. "This is no time for
your fooling. Have a care how you talk in the same breath of pots and
my Lord Bishop!"

"_Sanct ecclesi_," Father Carey broke out, turning up his eyes in a
kind of ecstasy, as though he were knee to knee with the prelate--"_te
defensorem inclytum atque ardentem----_"

"_Pottum!_" cried I, laughing loudly at my own wit.

It was an ill-mannered word, but I was cold and peevish. I had been
forced to this function against my will. I had never seen the guest
whom we were expecting, and who was no other than the Queen's
Chancellor, Stephen Gardiner, but I disliked him as if I had. In
truth, he was related to us in a peculiar fashion, which my uncle and
I naturally looked at from different standpoints. Sir Anthony viewed
with complacence, if not with pride, any connection with the powerful
Bishop of Winchester, for the knight knew the world, and could
appreciate the value it sets on success, and the blind eyes it has for
spots if they do but speckle the risen sun. I could make no such
allowance, but, with the pride of youth and family, at once despised
the great Bishop for his base blood, and blushed that the shame lay on
our side. I hated this parade of doing honor to him, and would fain
have hidden at home with Petronilla, my cousin, Sir Anthony's
daughter, and awaited our guest there. The knight, however, had not
permitted this, and I had been forced out, being in the worst of
humors.

So I said "_Pottum!_" and laughed.

"Silence, boy!" cried Sir Anthony fiercely. He loved an orderly
procession, and to arrange things decently. "Silence!" he repeated,
darting an angry glance first at me and then at his followers, "or I
will warm that jacket of yours, lad! And you, Martin Luther, see to
your tongue for the next twenty-four hours, and keep it off my Lord
Bishop! And, Father Carey, hold yourself ready----"

"For here Sir Hot-Pot cometh!" cried the undaunted Martin, skipping
nimbly down from his post of vantage; "and a dozen of London saucepans
with him, or may I never lick the inside of one again!"

A jest on the sauciness of London serving-men was sure to tell with
the crowd, and there was a great laugh at this, especially among the
landless men, who were on the skirts of the party, and well sheltered
from Sir Anthony's eye. He glared about him, provoked to find at this
critical moment smiles where there should have been looks of
deference, and a ring round a fool where he had marshaled a
procession. Unluckily, he chose to visit his displeasure upon me. "You
won't behave, won't you, you puppy!" he cried. "You won't, won't you!"
and stepping forward he aimed a blow at my shoulders, which would have
made me rub myself if it had reached me. But I was too quick. I
stepped back, the stick swung idly, and the crowd laughed.

And there the matter would have ended, for the Bishop's party were now
close upon us, had not my foot slipped on the wet grass and I fallen
backward. Seeing me thus at his mercy, the temptation proved too much
for the knight. He forgot his love of seemliness and even that his
visitors were at his elbow--and, stooping a moment to plant home a
couple of shrewd cuts, cried, "Take that! Take that, my lad!" in a
voice that rang as crisply as his thwacks.

I was up in an instant; not that the pain was anything, and before our
own people I should have thought as little of shame, for if the old
may not lay hand to the young, being related, where is to be any
obedience? Now, however, my first glance met the grinning faces of
strange lackeys, and while my shoulders still smarted, the laughter of
a couple of soberly-clad pages stung a hundred times more sharply. I
glared furiously round, and my eyes fell on one face--a face long
remembered. It was that of a man who neither smiled nor laughed; a man
whom I recognized immediately, not by his sleek hackney or his purple
cassock, which a riding-coat partially concealed, or even by his
jeweled hand, but by the keen glance of power which passed over me,
took me in, and did not acknowledge me; which saw my humiliation
without interest or amusement. The look hurt me beyond smarting of
shoulders, for it conveyed to me in the twentieth part of a second how
very small a person Francis Cludde was, and how very great a personage
was Stephen Gardiner, whom in my thoughts I had presumed to belittle.

I stood irresolute a moment, shifting my feet and glowering at him, my
face on fire. But when he raised his hand to give the Benediction, and
the more devout, or those with mended hose, fell on their knees in the
mud, I turned my back abruptly, and, climbing the wall, flung away
across the chase.

"What, Sir Anthony!" I heard him say as I stalked off, his voice
ringing clear and incisive amid the reverential silence which followed
the Latin words; "have we a heretic here, cousin? How is this? So near
home too!"

"It is my nephew, my Lord Bishop," I could hear Sir Anthony answer,
apology in his tone; "and a willful boy at times. You know of him; he
has queer notions of his own, put into his head long ago."

I caught no more, my angry strides carrying me out of earshot. Fuming,
I hurried across the long damp grass, avoiding here and there the
fallen limb of an elm or a huge round of holly. I wanted to get out of
the way, and be out of the way; and made such haste that before the
slowly moving cavalcade had traversed one-half of the interval between
the road and the house I had reached the bridge which crossed the
moat, and, pushing my way impatiently through the maids and scullions
who had flocked to it to see the show, had passed into the courtyard.

The light was failing, and the place looked dark and gloomy in spite
of the warm glow of burning logs which poured from the lower windows,
and some show of green boughs which had been placed over the doorways
in honor of the occasion. I glanced up at a lattice in one of the
gables--the window of Petronilla's little parlor. There was no face at
it, and I turned fretfully into the hall--and yes, there she was,
perched up in one of the high window-seats. She was looking out on the
chase, as the maids were doing.

Yes, as the maids were doing. She too was watching for his High
Mightiness, I muttered, and that angered me afresh. I crossed the
rushes in silence, and climbed up beside her.

"Well," I said ungraciously, as she started, hearing me at her
shoulder, "well, have you seen enough of him yet, cousin? You will, I
warrant you, before he leaves. A little of him goes far."

"A little of whom, Francis?" she asked simply.

Though her voice betrayed some wonder at my rough tone, she was so
much engaged with the show that she did not look at me immediately.
This of course kept my anger warm, and I began to feel that she was in
the conspiracy against me.

"Of my Lord of Winchester, of course," I answered, laughing rudely;
"of Sir Hot-Pot!"

"Why do you call him that?" she remonstrated in gentle wonder. And
then she did turn her soft dark eyes upon me. She was a slender,
willowy girl in those days, with a complexion clear yet pale--a maiden
all bending and gracefulness, yet with a great store of secret
firmness, as I was to learn. "He seems as handsome an old man," she
continued, "as I have ever met, and stately and benevolent, too, as I
see him at this distance. What is the matter with you, Francis? What
has put you out?"

"Put me out!" I retorted angrily. "Who said anything had put me out?"

But I reddened under her eyes; I was longing to tell her all, and be
comforted, while at the same time I shrank with a man's shame from
saying to her that I had been beaten.

"I can see that something is the matter," she said sagely, with her
head on one side, and that air of being the elder which she often
assumed with me, though she was really the younger by two years. "Why
did you not wait for the others? Why have you come home alone?
Francis," [with sudden conviction] "you have vexed my father! That is
it!"

"He has beaten me like a dog!" I blurted out passionately; "and before
them all! Before those strangers he flogged me!"

She had her back to the window, and some faint gleam of wintry
sunshine, passing through the gules of the shield blazoned behind her,
cast a red stain on her dark hair and shapely head. She was silent,
probably through pity or consternation; but I could not see her face,
and misread her. I thought her hard, and, resenting this, bragged on
with a lad's empty violence.

"He did; but I will not stand it! I give you warning, I won't stand
it, Petronilla!" and I stamped, young bully that I was, until the dust
sprang out of the boards, and the hounds by the distant hearth jumped
up and whined. "No! not for all the base bishops in England!" I
continued, taking a step this way and that. "He had better not do it
again! If he does, I tell you it will be the worse for some one!"

"Francis," she exclaimed abruptly, "you must not speak in that way!"

But I was too angry to be silenced, though instinctively I changed my
ground.

"Stephen Gardiner!" I cried furiously. "Who is Stephen Gardiner, I
should like to know? He has no right to call himself Gardiner at all!
Dr. Stephens he used to call himself, I have heard. A child with no
name but his godfather's; that is what he is, for all his airs and his
bishopric! Who is he to look on and see a Cludde beaten? If my uncle
does not take care----"

"Francis!" she cried again, cutting me short ruthlessly. "Be silent,
sir!" [and this time I was silent], "You unmanly boy," she continued,
her face glowing with indignation, "to threaten my father before my
face! How dare you, sir? How dare you? And who are you, you poor
child," she exclaimed, with a startling change from invective to
sarcasm--"who are you to talk of bishops, I should like to know?"

"One," I said sullenly, "who thinks less of cardinals and bishops than
some folk, Mistress Petronilla!"

"Ay, I know," she retorted scathingly--"I know that you are a kind of
half-hearted Protestant--neither fish, flesh, nor fowl!"

"I am what my father made me!" I muttered.

"At any rate," she replied, "you do not see how small you are, or you
would not talk of bishops. Heaven help us! That a boy who has done
nothing and seen nothing, should talk of the Queen's Chancellor! Go!
Go on, you foolish boy, and rule a country, or cut off heads, and then
you may talk of such men--men who could unmake you and yours with a
stroke of the pen! You, to talk so of Stephen Gardiner! Fie, fie, I
say! For shame!"

I looked at her, dazed and bewildered, and had long afterward in my
mind a picture of her as she stood above me, in the window bay, her
back to the light, her slender figure drawn to its full height, her
hand extended toward me. I could scarcely understand or believe that
this was my gentle cousin. I turned without a word and stole away, not
looking behind me. I was cowed.

It happened that the servants came hurrying in at the moment with a
clatter of dishes and knives, and the noise covered my retreat. I had
a fancy afterward that, as I moved away, Petronilla called to me. But
at the time, what with the confusion and my own disorder, I paid no
heed to her, but got myself blindly out of the hall, and away to my
own attic.

It was a sharp lesson. But my feelings when, being alone, I had time
to feel, need not be set down. After events made them of no moment,
for I was even then on the verge of a change so great that all the
threats and misgivings, the fevers and agues, of that afternoon, real
as they seemed at the time, became in a few hours as immaterial as the
dew which fell before yesterday's thunderstorm.

The way the change began to come about was this. I crept in late to
supper, facing the din and lights, the rows of guests and the hurrying
servants, with a mixture of shame and sullenness. I was sitting down
with a scowl next the Bishop's pages--my place was beside them,
half-way down the table, and I was not too careful to keep my feet
clear of their clothing--when my uncle's voice, raised in a harsher
tone than was usual with him, even when he was displeased, summoned
me.

"Come here, sirrah!" he cried roundly. "Come here, Master Francis! I
have a word to speak to you!"

I went slowly, dragging my feet, while all looked up, and there was a
partial silence. I was conscious of this, and it nerved me. For a
moment indeed, as I stepped on to the dais I had a vision of scores of
candles and rushlights floating in mist, and of innumerable bodiless
faces all turned up to me. But the vision and the mistiness passed
away, and left only my uncle's long, thin face inflamed with anger,
and beside it, in the same ring of light, the watchful eyes and stern,
impassive features of Stephen Gardiner. The Bishop's face and his eyes
were all I saw then; the same face, the same eyes, I remembered, which
had looked unyielding into those of the relentless Cromwell and had
scarce dropped before the frown of a Tudor. His purple cap and
cassock, the lace and rich fur, the chain of office, I remembered
afterward.

"Now, boy," thundered Sir Anthony, pointing out the place where I
should stand, "what have you to say for yourself? why have you so
misbehaved this afternoon? Let your tongue speak quickly, do you hear,
or you will smart for it. And let it be to the purpose, boy!"

I was about to answer something--whether it was likely to make things
worse or better, I cannot remember--when Gardiner stayed me. He laid
his hand gently on Sir Anthony's sleeve, and interposed. "One moment,"
he said mildly, "your nephew did not stay for the Church's blessing, I
remember. Perhaps he has scruples. There are people nowadays who have.
Let us hear if it be so."

This time it was Sir Anthony who did not let me answer.

"No, no," he cried hastily; "no, no; it is not so. He conforms, my
lord, he conforms. You conform, sir," he continued, turning fiercely
upon me, "do you not? Answer, sir."

"Ah!" the Bishop put in with a sneer, "you conform, do you?"

"I attend mass--to please my uncle," I replied boldly.

"He was ill brought up as a child," Sir Anthony said hastily, speaking
in a tone which those below could not hear. "But you know all that, my
lord--you know all that. It is an old story to you. So I make, and I
pray you to make for the sake of the house, some allowance. He
conforms; he undoubtedly conforms."

"Enough!" Gardiner assented. "The rest is for the good priest here,
whose ministrations will no doubt in time avail. But a word with this
young gentleman, Sir Anthony, on another subject. If it was not to the
holy office he objected, perhaps it was to the Queen's Chancellor, or
to the Queen?" He raised his voice with the last words and bent his
brows, so that I could scarcely believe it was the same man speaking.
"Eh, sir, was that so?" he continued severely, putting aside Sir
Anthony's remonstrance and glowering at me. "It may be that we have a
rebel here instead of a heretic."

"God forbid!" cried the knight, unable to contain himself. It was
clear that he repented already of his ill-timed discipline. "I will
answer for it that we have no Wyatts here, my lord."

"That is well!" the Chancellor replied. "That is well!" he repeated,
his eyes leaving me and roving the hall with so proud a menace in
their glance that all quailed, even the fool. "That is very well," he
said, drumming on the table with his fingers; "but let Master Francis
speak for himself."

"I never heard," said I boldly--I had had a moment for thought--"that
Sir Thomas Wyatt had any following in this country. None to my
knowledge. As for the Queen's marriage with the Prince of Spain, which
was the ground, as we gathered here, of Wyatt's rising with the
Kentish folk, it seems a matter rather for the Queen's grace than her
subjects. But if that be not so, I, for my part, would rather have
seen her married to a stout Englishman--ay, or to a Frenchman."

"And why, young gentleman?"

"Because I would we kept at peace with France. We have more to gain by
fighting Spain than fighting France," I answered bluntly.

My uncle held up his hands. "The boy is clean mad!" he groaned. "Who
ever heard of such a thing? With all France, the rightful estate of
her Majesty, waiting to be won back, he talks of fighting Spain! And
his own grandmother was a Spaniard!"

"I am none the less an Englishman for that!" I said; whereon there was
a slight murmur of applause in the hall below. "And for France," I
continued, carried away by this, "we have been fighting it, off and
on, as long as men remember; and what are we the better? We have only
lost what we had to begin. Besides, I am told that France is five
times stronger than it was in Henry the Fifth's time, and we should
only spend our strength in winning what we could not hold. While as to
Spain----"

"Ay, as to Spain?" grumbled Sir Anthony, forgetting his formidable
neighbor, and staring at me with eyes of wonder. "Why, my father
fought the French at Guinegate, and my grandfather at Cherbourg, and
his father at Agincourt! But there! As to Spain, you popinjay?"

"Why, she is conquering here," I answered warmly, "and colonizing
there among the newly-discovered countries of the world, and getting
all the trade and all the seaports and all the gold and silver; and
Spain after all is a nation with no greater strength of men than
England. Ay, and I hear," I cried, growing more excited and raising my
voice, "that now is our time or never! The Spaniards and the
Portuguese have discovered a new world over seas.


                    "A Castilla y  Leon
                     Nuevo mundo di Coton!


say they; but depend upon it, every country that is to be rich and
strong in the time that is coming must have part in it. We cannot
conquer either Spain or France; we have not men enough. But we have
docks and sailors, and ships in London and Fowey, and Bristol and the
Cinque Ports, enough to fight Spain over the great seas, and I say,
'Have at her!'"

"What next?" groaned Sir Anthony piteously. "Did man ever hear such
crackbrained nonsense?"

But I think it was not nonsense, for his words were almost lost in the
cry which ran through the hall as I ceased speaking--a cry of English
voices. One moment my heart beat high and proudly with a new sense of
power; the next, as a shadow of a cloud falls on a sunny hillside, the
cold sneer on the statesman's face fell on me and chilled me. His set
look had neither thawed nor altered, his color had neither come nor
gone. "You speak your lesson well, lad," he said. "Who taught you
statecraft?"

I grew smaller, shrinking with each word he uttered; and faltered, and
was dumb.

"Come," he said, "you see but a little way; yet country lads do not
talk of Fowey and Bristol! Who primed you?"

"I met a Master Sebastian Cabot," I said reluctantly at last, when he
had pressed me more than once, "who stayed a while at a house not far
from here, and had been Inspector of the Navy to King Edward. He had
been a seaman seventy years, and he talked----"

"Too fast!" said Gardiner, with a curt nod. "But enough, I understand.
I know the man. He is dead."

He was silent then, and seemed to have fallen suddenly into thought,
as a man well might who had the governing of a kingdom on his
shoulders.

Seemingly he had done with me. I looked at Sir Anthony. "Ay, go!" he
said irritably, waving me off. "Go!"

And I went. The ordeal was over, and over so successfully that I felt
the humiliation of the afternoon cheap at the price of this triumph;
for, as I stepped down, there was a buzz around me, a murmur of
congratulation and pride and excitement. On every Coton face I marked
a flush, in every Coton eye I read a sparkle, and every flush and
every sparkle was for me. Even the Chancellor's secretaries, grave,
down-looking men, all secrecy and caution, cast curious glances at me,
as though I were something out of the common; and the Chancellor's
pages made way for me with new-born deference. "There is for country
wits!" I heard Baldwin Moor cry gleefully, while the man who put food
before me murmured of "the Cludde bull-pup!" If I read in Father
Carey's face, as indeed I did, solicitude as well as relief and
gladness, I marked the latter only, and hugged a natural pride to my
breast. When Martin Luther said boldly that it was not only Bishop
could fill a bowl, it was by an effort I refrained from joining in the
laugh which followed.

For an hour I enjoyed this triumph, and did all but brag of it.
Especially I wished Petronilla had witnessed it. At the end of that
time--_Finis_, as the book says. I was crossing the courtyard,
one-half of which was bathed in a cold splendor of moonlight, and was
feeling the first sobering touch of the night air on my brow, when I
heard some one call out my name. I turned, to find one of the
Chancellor's servants, a sleek, substantial fellow, with a smug mouth,
at my elbow.

"What is it?" I said.

"I am bidden to fetch you at once, Master Cludde," he answered, a
gleam of sly malice peeping through the gravity of his demeanor. "The
Chancellor would see you in his room, young sir."




                             CHAPTER II.

                        IN THE BISHOP'S ROOM.


Chancellor was lodged in the great chamber on the southern side of the
courtyard, a room which we called the Tapestried Chamber, and in which
tradition said that King Henry the Sixth had once slept. It was on the
upper floor, and for this reason free from the damp air which in
autumn and winter rose from the moat and hung about the lower range of
rooms. It was besides, of easy access from the hall, a door in the
gallery of the latter leading into an anteroom, which again opened
into the Tapestried Chamber; while a winding staircase, starting from
a dark nook in the main passage of the house, also led to this state
apartment, but by another and more private door.

I reached the antechamber with a stout heart in my breast, though a
little sobered by my summons, and feeling such a reaction from the
heat of a few minutes before as follows a plunge into cold water. In
the anteroom I was bidden to wait while the great man's will was
taken, which seemed strange to me, then unused to the mummery of Court
folk. But before I had time to feel much surprise, the inner door was
opened, and I was told to enter.

The great room, which I had seldom seen in use, had now an appearance
quite new to me. A dull red fire was glowing comfortably on the
hearthstone, before which a posset stool was standing. Near this,
seated at a table strewn with a profusion of papers and documents, was
a secretary writing busily. The great oaken bedstead, with its nodding
tester, lay in a background of shadows, which played about the figures
broidered on the hangings, or were lost in the darkness of the
corners; while near the fire, in the light cast by the sconces fixed
above the hearth, lay part of the Chancellor's equipment. The fur rugs
and cloak of sable, the saddle-bags, the dispatch-boxes, and the
silver chafing-dish, gave an air of comfort to this part of the room.
Walking up and down in the midst of these, dictating a sentence at
every other turn, was Stephen Gardiner.

As I entered the clerk looked up, holding his pen suspended. His
master, by a quick nod, ordered him to proceed. Then, signaling to me
in a like silent fashion his command that I should stand by the
hearth, the Bishop resumed his task of composition.

For some minutes my interest in the man, whom I had now an opportunity
of scrutinizing unmarked and at my leisure, took up all my attention.
He was at this time close on seventy, but looked, being still tall and
stout, full ten years younger. His face, square and sallow, was indeed
wrinkled and lined; his eyes lay deep in his head, his shoulders were
beginning to bend, the nape of his neck to become prominent. He had
lost an inch of his full height. But his eyes still shone brightly,
nor did any trace of weakness mar the stern character of his mouth, or
the crafty wisdom of his brow. The face was the face of a man austere,
determined, perhaps cruel; of a man who could both think and act.

My curiosity somewhat satisfied, I had leisure, first to wonder why I
had been sent for, and then to admire the prodigious number of books
and papers which lay about, more, indeed, than I had ever seen
together in my life. From this I passed to listening, idly at first,
and with interest afterward, to the letter which the Chancellor was
dictating. It seemed from its tenor to be a letter to some person in
authority, and presently one passage attracted my attention, so that I
could afterward recall it word for word.

"I do not think"--the Chancellor pronounced, speaking in a sonorous
voice, and the measured tone of one whose thoughts lie perfectly
arranged in his head--"that the Duchess Katherine will venture to take
the step suggested as possible. Yet Clarence's report may be of
moment. Let the house, therefore, be watched if anything savoring of
flight be marked, and take notice whether there be a vessel in the
Pool adapted to her purpose. A vessel trading to Dunquerque would be
most likely. Leave her husband till I return, when I will deal with
him roundly."

I missed what followed. It was upon another subject, and my thoughts
lagged behind, being wholly taken up with the Duchess Katherine and
her fortunes. I wondered who she was, young or old, and what this step
could be she was said to meditate, and what the jargon about the Pool
and Dunquerque meant. I was still thinking of this when I was aroused
by an abrupt silence, and looking up found that the Chancellor was
bending over the papers on the table. The secretary was leaving the
room.

As the door closed behind him, Gardiner rose from his stooping posture
and came slowly toward me, a roll of papers in his hand. "Now," he
said tranquilly, seating himself in an elbow-chair which stood in
front of the hearth, "I will dispose of your business, Master Cludde."

He paused, looking at me in a shrewd, masterful way, much as if--I
thought at the time, little knowing how near the truth my fancy
went--I were a beast he was about to buy; and then he went on. "I have
sent for you, Master Francis," he said dryly, fixing his piercing eyes
on mine, "because I think that this country does not suit your health.
You conform, but you conform with a bad grace, and England is no
longer the place for such. You incite the commonalty against the
Queen's allies, and England is not the place for such. Do not
contradict me; I have heard you myself. Then," he continued, grimly
thrusting out his jaw in a sour smile, "you misname those whom the
Queen honors; and were Dr. Stephens--you take me, Master Malapert?
such a man as his predecessors, you would rue the word. For a trifle
scarce weightier Wolsey threw a man to rot six years in a dungeon,
boy!"

I changed color, yet not so much in fear--though it were vain to say I
did not tremble--as in confusion. I had called him Dr. Stephens
indeed, but it had been to Petronilla only. I stood, not knowing what
to say, until he, after lingering on his last words to enjoy my
misery, resumed his subject. "That is one good and sufficient
reason--mind you, sufficient, boy--why England is no place for you.
For another, the Cluddes have always been soldiers; and you--though
readier-witted than some, which comes of your Spanish grandmother--are
quicker with a word than a thought, and a blow than either. Of which
afterward. Well, England is going to be no place for soldiers. Please
God, we have finished with wars at home. A woman's reign should be a
reign of peace."

I hardened my heart at that. A reign of peace, forsooth, when the week
before we had heard of a bishop burned at Gloucester! I hardened my
heart. I would not be frightened, though I knew his power, and knew
how men in those days misused power. I would put a bold face on the
matter.

He had not done with me yet, however. "One more reason I have," he
continued, stopping me as I was about to speak, "for saying that
England will not suit your health, Master Cludde. It is that I do not
want you here. Abroad, you may be of use to me, and at the same time
carve out your own fortune. You have courage and can use a sword, I
hear. You understand--and it is a rare gift with Englishmen--some
Spanish, which I suppose your father or your uncle taught you. You
can--so Father Carey says--construe a Latin sentence if it be not too
difficult. You are scarcely twenty, and you will have me for your
patron. Why, were I you, boy, with your age and your chances, I would
die Prince or Pope! Ay, I would!" He stopped speaking, his eyes on
fire. Nay, a ring of such real feeling flashed out in his last words
that, though I distrusted him, though old prejudices warned me against
him, and, at heart a Protestant, I shuddered at things I had heard of
him, the longing to see the world and have adventures seized upon me.
Yet I did not speak at once. He had told me that my tongue outran my
thoughts, and I stood silent until he asked me curtly, "Well, sirrah,
what do you say?"

"I say, my Lord Bishop," I replied respectfully, "that the prospect
you hold out to me would tempt me were I a younger son, or without
those ties of gratitude which hold me to my uncle. But, my father
excepted, I am Sir Anthony's only heir."

"Ah, your father!" he said contemptuously. "You do well to remind me
of him, for I see you are forgetting the first part of my speech in
thinking of the last! Should I have promised first and threatened
later? You would fain, I expect, stay here and woo Mistress
Petronilla? Do I touch you there? You think to marry the maid and be
master of Coton End in God's good time, do you? Then listen, Francis
Cludde. Neither one nor the other, neither maid nor meadow will be
yours should you stay here till Doomsday!"

I started, and stood glowering on him, speechless with anger and
astonishment.

"You do not know who you are," he continued, leaning forward with a
sudden movement, and speaking with one claw-like finger extended, and
a malevolent gleam in his eyes. "You called me a nameless child a
while ago, and so I was; yet have I risen to be ruler of England,
Master Cludde! But you--I will tell you which of us is base-born. I
will tell you who and what your father, Ferdinand Cludde, was. He was,
nay, he is, my tool, spy, jackal! Do you understand, boy? Your father
is one of the band of foul creatures to whom such as I, base-born
though I be, fling the scraps from their table! He is the vilest of
the vile men who do my dirty work, my lad."

He had raised his voice and hand in passion, real or assumed. He
dropped them as I sprang forward. "You lie!" I cried, trembling all
over.

"Easy! easy!" he said. He stopped me where I was by a gesture of stern
command. "Think!" he continued, calmly and weightily. "Has any one
ever spoken to you of your father since the day seven years ago, when
you came here, a child, brought by a servant? Has Sir Anthony talked
of him? Has any servant named his name to you. Think, boy. If
Ferdinand Cludde be a father to be proud of, why does his brother make
naught of him?"

"He is a Protestant," I said faintly. Faintly, because I had asked
myself this very question not once but often. Sir Anthony so seldom
mentioned my father that I had thought it strange myself. I had
thought it strange, too, that the servants, who must well remember
Ferdinand Cludde, never talked to me about him. Hitherto I had always
been satisfied to answer, "He is a Protestant"; but face to face with
this terrible old man and his pitiless charge, the words came but
faintly from my lips.

"A Protestant," he replied solemnly. "Yes, this comes of schism, that
villains cloak themselves in it, and parade for true men. A Protestant
you call him, boy? He has been that, ay, and all things to all men;
and he has betrayed all things and all men. He was in the great
Cardinal's confidence, and forsook him, when he fell, for Cromwell.
Thomas Cromwell, although they were of the same persuasion, he
betrayed to me. I have here, here"--and he struck the letters in his
hand a scornful blow--"the offer he made to me, and his terms. Then
eight years back, when the late King Edward came to the throne, I too
fell on evil days, and Master Cludde abandoned me for my Lord
Hertford, but did me no great harm. But he did something which blasted
him--blasted him at last."

He paused. Had the fire died down, or was it only my imagination
that the shadows thickened round the bed behind him, and closed in
more nearly on us, leaving his pale grim face to confront me--his
face, which seemed the paler and grimmer, the more saturnine and
all-mastering, for the dark frame which set it off?

"He did this," he continued slowly, "which came to light and blasted
him. He asked, as the price of his service in betraying me, his
brother's estate."

"Impossible!" I stammered. "Why, Sir Anthony----"

"What of Sir Anthony, you would ask?" the Chancellor replied,
interrupting me with savage irony. "Oh, he was a Papist! an obstinate
Papist! He might go hang--or to Warwick Jail!"

"Nay, but this at least, my lord, is false!" I cried. "Palpably false!
If my father had so betrayed his own flesh and blood, should I be
here? Should I be at Coton End? You say this happened eight years ago.
Seven years ago I came here. Would Sir Anthony----"

"There are fools everywhere," the old man sneered. "When my Lord
Hertford refused your father's suit, Ferdinand began--it is his
nature--to plot against him. He was found out, and execrated by
all--for he had been false to all--he fled for his life. He left you
behind, and a servant brought you to Coton End, where Sir Anthony took
you in."

I covered my face. Alas! I believed him; I, who had always been so
proud of my lineage, so proud of the brave traditions of the house and
its honor, so proud of Coton End and all that belonged to it! Now, if
this were true, I could never again take pleasure in one or the other.
I was the son of a man branded as a turncoat and an informer, of one
who was the worst of traitors! I sank down on the settle behind me and
hid my face. Another might have thought less of the blow, or, with
greater knowledge of the world, might have made light of it as a thing
not touching himself. But on me, young as I was, and proud, and as yet
tender, and having done nothing myself, it fell with crushing force.

It was years since I had seen my father, and I could not stand forth
loyally and fight his battle, as a son his father's friend and
familiar for years might have fought it. On the contrary, there was so
much which seemed mysterious in my past life, so much that bore out
the Chancellor's accusation, that I felt a dread of its truth even
before I had proof. Yet I would have proof. "Show me the letters!" I
said harshly; "show me the letters, my lord!"

"You know your father's handwriting?"

"I do."

I knew it, not from any correspondence my father had held with me, but
because I had more than once examined with natural curiosity the
wrappers of the dispatches which at intervals of many months,
sometimes of a year, came from him to Sir Anthony. I had never known
anything of the contents of the letters, all that fell to my share
being certain formal messages, which Sir Anthony would give me,
generally with a clouded brow and a testy manner that grew genial
again only with the lapse of time.

Gardiner handed me the letters, and I took them and read one. One was
enough. That my father! Alas! alas! No wonder that I turned my face to
the wall, shivering as with the ague, and that all about me--except
the red glow of the fire, which burned into my brain--seemed darkness!
I had lost the thing I valued most. I had lost at a blow everything of
which I was proud. The treachery that could flush that worn face
opposite to me, lined as it was with statecraft, and betray the wily
tongue into passion, seemed to me, young and impulsive, a thing so
vile as to brand a man's children through generations.

Therefore I hid my face in the corner of the settle, while the
Chancellor gazed at me a while in silence, as one who had made an
experiment might watch the result.

"You see now, my friend," he said at last, almost gently, "that you
may be base-born in more ways than one. But be of good cheer; you are
young, and what I have done you may do. Think of Thomas Cromwell--his
father was naught. Think of the old Cardinal--my master. Think of the
Duke of Suffolk--Charles Brandon, I mean. He was a plain gentleman,
yet he married a queen. More, the door which they had to open for
themselves I will open for you--only, when you are inside, play the
man, and be faithful."

"What would you have me do?" I whispered hoarsely.

"I would have you do this," he answered. "There are great things
brewing in the Netherlands, boy--great changes, unless I am mistaken.
I have need of an agent there, a man, stout, trusty, and, in
particular, unknown, who will keep me informed of events. If you will
be that agent, I can procure for you--and not appear in the matter
myself--a post of pay and honor in the Regent's Guards. What say you
to that, Master Cludde? A few weeks and you will be making history,
and Coton End will seem a mean place to you. Now, what do you say?"

I was longing to be away and alone with my misery, but I forced myself
to reply patiently.

"With your leave I will give you my answer to-morrow, my lord," I
said, as steadily as I could; and I rose, still keeping my face turned
from him.

"Very well," he replied, with apparent confidence. But he watched me
keenly, as I fancied. "I know already what your answer will be. Yet
before you go I will give you a piece of advice which in the new
life you begin to-night will avail you more than silver, more than
gold--ay, more than steel, Master Francis. It is this: Be prompt to
think, be prompt to strike, be slow to speak! Mark it well! It is a
simple recipe, yet it has made me what I am, and may make you greater.
Now go!"

He pointed to the little door opening on the staircase, and I bowed
and went out, closing it carefully behind me. On the stairs, moving
blindly in the dark, I fell over some one who lay sleeping there, and
who clutched at my leg. I shook him off, however, with an exclamation
of rage, and, stumbling down the rest of the steps, gained the open
air. Excited and feverish, I shrank with aversion from the confinement
of my room, and, hurrying over the drawbridge, sought at random the
long terrace by the fish-pools, on which the moonlight fell, a sheet
of silver, broken only by the sundial and the shadows of the rose
bushes. The night air, weeping chill from the forest, fanned my cheeks
as I paced up and down. One way I had before me the manor-house--the
steep gable-ends, the gateway tower, the low outbuildings and
cornstacks and stables--and flanking these the squat tower and nave of
the church. I turned. Now I saw only the water and the dark line of
trees which fringed the further bank. But above these the stars were
shining.

Yet in my mind there was no starlight. There all was a blur of wild
passions and resolves. Shame and an angry resentment against those who
had kept me so long in ignorance--even against Sir Anthony--were my
uppermost feelings. I smarted under the thought that I had been living
on his charity. I remembered many a time when I had taken much on
myself, and he had smiled, and the remembrance stung me. I longed to
assert myself and do something to wipe off the stain.

But should I accept the Bishop's offer? It never crossed my mind to do
so. He had humiliated me, and I hated him for it. Longing to cut
myself off from my old life, I could not support a patron who would
know, and might cast in my teeth the old shame. A third reason, too,
worked powerfully with me as I became cooler. This was the conviction
that, apart from the glitter which the old man's craft had cast about
it, the part he would have me play was that of a spy--an informer! A
creature like--I dared not say like my father, yet I had him in my
mind. And from this, from the barest suspicion of this, I shrank as
the burned puppy from the fire--shrank with fierce twitching of nerve
and sinew.

Yet if I would not accept his offer it was clear I must fend for
myself. His threats meant as much as that, and I smiled sternly as I
found necessity at one with inclination. I would leave Coton End at
once, and henceforth I would fight for my own hand. I would have no
name until I had made for myself a new one.

This resolve formed, I turned and went back to the house, and felt my
way to my own chamber. The moonlight poured through the lattice and
fell white on my pallet. I crossed the room and stood still. Down the
middle of the coverlet--or my eyes deceived me--lay a dark line.

I stooped mechanically to see what this was and found my own sword
lying there; the sword which Sir Anthony had given me on my last
birthday. But how had it come there? As I took it up something soft
and light brushed my hand and drooped from the hilt. Then I
remembered. A week before I had begged Petronilla to make me a
sword-knot of blue velvet for use on state occasions. No doubt she had
done it, and had brought the sword back this evening, and laid it
there in token of peace.

I sat down on my bed, and softer and kindlier thoughts came to me;
thoughts of love and gratitude, in which the old man who had been a
second father to me had part. I would go as I had resolved, but I
would return to them when I had done a thing worth doing; something
which should efface the brand that lay on me now.

With gentle fingers I disengaged the velvet knot and thrust it into my
bosom. Then I tied about the hilt the old leather thong, and began to
make my preparations; considering this or that route while I hunted
for my dagger and changed my doublet and hose for stouter raiment and
long, untanned boots. I was yet in the midst of this, when a knock at
the door startled me.

"Who is there?" I asked, standing erect.

For answer Martin Luther slid in, closing the door behind him. The
fool did not speak, but turning his eyes first on one thing and then
on another nodded sagely.

"Well?" I growled.

"You are off, master," he said, nodding again. "I thought so."

"Why did you think so?" I retorted impatiently.

"It is time for the young birds to fly when the cuckoo begins to
stir," he answered.

I understood him dimly and in part. "You have been listening," I said
wrathfully, my cheeks burning.

"And been kicked in the face like a fool for my pains," he answered.
"Ah, well, it is better to be kicked by the boot you love than kissed
by the lips you hate. But Master Francis, Master Francis!" he
continued in a whisper.

He said no more, and I looked up. The man was stooping slightly
forward, his pale face thrust out. There was a strange gleam in his
eyes, and his teeth grinned in the moonlight. Thrice he drew his
finger across his lean knotted throat. "Shall I?" he hissed, his hot
breath reaching me, "shall I?"

I recoiled from him shuddering. It was a ghastly pantomime, and it
seemed to me that I saw madness in his eyes.

"In Heaven's name, no!" I cried--"No! Do you hear, Martin? No!"

He stood back on the instant, as a dog might have done being reproved.
But I could hardly finish in comfort after that with him standing
there, although when I next turned to him he seemed half asleep and
his eyes were dull and fishy as ever.

"One thing you can do," I said brusquely. Then I hesitated, looking
round me. I wished to send something to Petronilla, some word, some
keepsake. But I had nothing that would serve a maid's purpose, and
could think of nothing until my eye lit on a house-martin's nest,
lying where I had cast it on the window-sill. I had taken it down that
morning because the droppings during the last summer had fallen on the
lead work, and I would not have it used when the swallows returned. It
was but a bit of clay, and yet it would serve. She would guess its
meaning.

I gave it into his hands. "Take this," I said, "and give it privately
to Mistress Petronilla. Privately, you understand. And say nothing to
any one, or the Bishop will flay your back, Martin."




                             CHAPTER III.

                        "DOWN WITH PURVEYORS!"


The first streak of daylight found me already footing it through the
forest by paths known to few save the woodcutters, but with which many
a boyish exploration had made me familiar. From Coton End the London
road lies plain and fair through Stratford-on-Avon and Oxford. But my
plan, the better to evade pursuit, was, instead, to cross the forest
in a northeasterly direction, and, passing by Warwick, to strike the
great north road between Coventry and Daventry, which, running thence
southeastward, would take me as straight as a bird might fly through
Dunstable, St. Albans, and Barnet, to London. My baggage consisted
only of my cloak, sword, and dagger; and for money I had but a gold
angel, and a few silver bits of doubtful value. But I trusted that
this store, slender as it was, would meet my charges as far as London.
Once there I must depend on my wits either for providence at home or a
passage abroad.

Striding steadily up and down hill, for Arden Forest is made up of
hills and dells which follow one another as do the wave and trough of
the sea, only less regularly, I made my way toward Wootton Wawen. As
soon as I espied its battlemented church lying in a wooded bottom
below me, I kept a more easterly course, and, leaving Henley-in-Arden
far to the left, passed down toward Leek Wootton. The damp, dead
bracken underfoot, the leafless oaks and gray sky overhead, nay the
very cry of the bittern fishing in the bottoms, seemed to be at one
with my thoughts; for these were dreary and sad enough.

But hope and a fixed aim form no bad makeshifts for happiness.
Striking the broad London road as I had purposed I slept that
night at Ryton Dunsmoor, and the next at Towcester; and the third day,
which rose bright and frosty, found me stepping gayly southward,
travel-stained indeed, but dry and whole. My spirits rose with the
temperature. For a time I put the past behind me, and found amusement
in the sights of the road; in the heavy wagons and long trains of
pack-horses, and the cheery greetings which met me with each mile.
After all, I had youth and strength, and the world before me; and
particularly Stony Stratford, where I meant to dine.

There was one trouble common among wayfarers which did not touch me;
and that was the fear of robbers, for he would be a sturdy beggar who
would rob an armed foot-passenger for the sake of an angel; and the
groats were gone. So I felt no terrors on that account, and even when
about noon I heard a horseman trot up behind me, and rein in his horse
so as to keep pace with me at a walk, step for step--a thing which
might have seemed suspicious to some--I took no heed of him. I was
engaged with my first view of Stratford, and did not turn my head. We
had walked on so for fifty paces or more, before it struck me as odd
that the man did not pass me.

Then I turned, and shading my eyes from the sun, which stood just over
his shoulder, said, "Good-day, friend."

"Good-day, master," he answered.

He was a stout fellow, looking like a citizen, although he had a sword
by his side, and wore it with an air of importance which the sunshine
of opportunity might have ripened into a swagger. His dress was plain;
and he sat a good hackney as a miller's sack might have sat it. His
face was the last thing I looked at. When I raised my eyes to it, I
got an unpleasant start. The man was no stranger. I knew him in a
moment for the messenger who had summoned me to the Chancellor's
presence.

The remembrance did not please me; and reading in the fellow's sly
look that he recognized me, and thought he had made a happy discovery
on finding me, I halted abruptly. He did the same.

"It is a fine morning," he said, taken aback by my sudden movement,
but affecting an indifference which the sparkle in his eye belied. "A
rare day for the time of year."

"It is," I answered, gazing steadily at him.

"Going to London? Or may be only to Stratford?" he hazarded. He
fidgeted uncomfortably under my eye, but still pretended ignorance of
me.

"That is as may be," I answered.

"No offense, I am sure," he said.

I cast a quick glance up and down the road. There happened to be no
one in sight. "Look here!" I replied, stepping forward to lay my hand
on the horse's shoulder--but the man reined back and prevented me,
thereby giving me a clew to his character--"you are in the service of
the Bishop of Winchester?"

His face fell, and he could not conceal his disappointment at being
recognized. "Well, master," he answered reluctantly, "perhaps I am,
and perhaps I am not."

"That is enough," I said shortly. "And you know me. You need not lie
about it, man, for I can see you do. Now, look here, Master Steward,
or whatever your name may be----"

"It is Master Pritchard," he put in sulkily; "and I am not ashamed of
it."

"Very well. Then let us understand one another. Do you mean to
interfere with me?"

He grinned. "Well, to be plain, I do," he replied, reining his horse
back another step. "I have orders to look out for you, and have you
stopped if I find you. And I must do my duty, sir; I am sworn to it,
Master Cludde."

"Right," said I calmly; "and I must do mine, which is to take care of
my skin." And I drew my sword and advanced upon him with a flourish.
"We will soon decide this little matter," I added grimly, one eye on
him and one on the empty road, "if you will be good enough to defend
yourself."

But there was no fight in the fellow. By good luck, too, he was so
startled that he did not do what he might have done with safety;
namely, retreat, and keep me in sight until some passers-by came up.
He did give back, indeed, but it was against the bank. "Have a care,"
he cried in a fume, his eye following my sword nervously; he did not
try to draw his own. "There is no call for fighting, I say."

"But I say there is," I replied bluntly. "Call and cause! Either you
fight me, or I go where I please."

"You may go to Bath for me!" he spluttered, his face the color of a
turkey-cock's wattles with rage.

"Do you mean it, my friend?" I said, and I played my point about his
leg, half-minded to give him a little prod by way of earnest. "Make up
your mind."

"Yes!" he shrieked out, suspecting my purpose, and bouncing about in
his saddle like a parched pea. "Yes, I say!" he roared. "Do you hear
me? You go your way, and I will go mine."

"That is a bargain," I said quietly; "and mind you keep to it."

I put up my sword with my face turned from him, lest he should see the
curl of my lip and the light in my eyes. In truth, I was uncommonly
well pleased with myself, and was thinking that if I came through all
my adventures as well, I should do merrily. Outwardly, however, I
tried to ignore my victory, and to make things as easy as I could for
my friend--if one may call a man who will not fight him a friend, a
thing I doubt. "Which way are you going?" I asked amicably; "to
Stratford?"

He nodded, for he was too sulky to speak.

"All right!" I said cheerfully, feeling that my dignity could take
care of itself now. "Then so far we may go together. Only do you
remember the terms. After dinner each goes his own way."

He nodded again, and we turned, and went on in silence, eying one
another askance, like two ill-matched dogs coupled together. But,
luckily, our forced companionship did not last long, a quarter of a
mile and a bend in the road bringing us to the first low, gray houses
of Stratford; a long, straggling village it seemed, made up of inns
strewn along the road, like beads threaded on a rosary. And to be
sure, to complete the likeness, we came presently upon an ancient
stone cross standing on the green. I pulled up in front of this with a
sigh of pleasure, for on either side of it, one facing the other, was
an inn of the better class.

"Well," I said, "which shall it be? The Rose and Crown, or the Crown
without the Rose?"

"Choose for yourself," he answered churlishly. "I go to the other."

I shrugged my shoulders. After all, you cannot make a silk purse out
of a sow's ear, and if a man has not courage he is not likely to have
good-fellowship. But the words angered me, nevertheless, for a shabby,
hulking fellow lounging at my elbow overheard them and grinned; a
hiccoughing, blear-eyed man he was as I had ever met, with a red nose
and the rags of a tattered cassock about him. I turned away in
annoyance, and chose the "Crown" at hazard; and pushing my way through
a knot of horses that stood tethered at the door, went in, leaving the
two to their devices.


I found a roaring fire in the great room, and three or four yeomen
standing about it, drinking ale. But I was hot from walking, so, after
saluting them and ordering my meal, I went and sat for choice on a
bench by the window away from the fire. The window was one of a kind
common in Warwickshire houses; long and low and beetle-browed, the
story above projecting over it. I sat here a minute looking idly out
at the inn opposite, a heavy stone building with a walled courtyard
attached to it; such an inn as was common enough about the time of the
Wars of the Roses when wayfarers looked rather for safety than
comfort. Presently I saw a boy come out of it and start up the road at
a run. Then, a minute later, the ragged fellow I had seen on the green
came out and lurched across the road. He seemed to be making, though
uncertainly, for my inn, and, sure enough, just as my bread and
bacon--the latter hot and hissing--were put before me, he staggered
into the room, bringing a strong smell of ale and onions with him.
"_Pax vobiscum!_" he said, leering at me with tipsy solemnity.

I guessed what he was--a monk, one of those unfortunates still to be
found here and there up and down the country, whom King Henry, when he
put down the monasteries, had made homeless. I did not look on the
class with much favor, thinking that for most of them the cloister,
even if the Queen should succeed in setting the abbeys on their legs
again, would have few attractions. But I saw that the simple farmers
received his scrap of Latin with respect, and I nodded civilly as I
went on with my meal.

I was not to get off so easily, however. He came and planted himself
opposite to me.

"_Pax vobiscum_, my son," he repeated. "The ale is cheap here, and
good."

"So is the ham, good father," I replied cheerfully, not pausing in my
attack on the victuals. "I will answer for so much."

"Well, well," the knave replied with ready wit, "I breakfasted early.
I am content. Landlord, another plate and a full tankard. The young
gentleman would have me dine with him."

I could not tell whether to be angry or to laugh at his impudence.

"The gentleman says he will answer for it!" repeated the rascal, with
a twinkle in his eye, as the landlord hesitated. He was by no means so
drunk as he looked.

"No, no, father," I cried, joining in the general laugh into which the
farmers by the fire broke. "A cup of ale is in reason, and for that I
will pay, but for no more. Drink it, and wish me Godspeed."

"I will do more than that, lad," he answered. Swaying to and fro
my cup, which he had seized in his grasp, he laid his hand on the
window-ledge beside me, as though to steady himself, and stooped until
his coarse, puffy face was but a few inches from mine. "More than
that," he whispered hoarsely; and his eyes, peering into mine, were
now sober and full of meaning. "If you do not want to be put in the
stocks or worse, make tracks! Make tracks, lad!" he continued. "Your
friend over there--he is a niggardly oaf--has sent for the hundredman
and the constable, and you are the quarry. So the word is, Go! That,"
he added aloud, standing erect again, with a drunken smile, "is for
your cup of ale; and good coin too!"

For half a minute I sat quite still; taken aback, and wondering, while
the bacon cooled on the plate before me, what I was to do. I did not
doubt the monk was telling the truth. Why should he lie to me? And I
cursed my folly in trusting to a coward's honor or a serving-man's
good faith. But lamentations were useless. What was I to do? I had no
horse, and no means of getting one. I was in a strange country, and to
try to escape on foot from pursuers who knew the roads, and had the
law on their side, would be a hopeless undertaking. Yet to be haled
back to Coton End a prisoner--I could not face that. Mechanically I
raised a morsel of bacon to my lips, and as I did so, a thought
occurred to me--an idea suggested by some talk I had heard the evening
before at Towcester.

Fanciful as the plan was, I snatched at it; and knowing each instant
to be precious, took my courage in my hand--and my tankard. "Here," I
cried, speaking suddenly and loudly, "here is bad luck to purveyors,
Master Host!"

There were a couple of stablemen within hearing, lounging in the
doorway, besides the landlord and his wife and the farmers. A villager
or two also had dropped in, and there were two peddlers lying half
asleep in the corner. All these pricked up their ears more or less at
my words. But, like most country folk, they were slow to take in
anything new or unexpected; and I had to drink afresh and say again,
"Here is bad luck to purveyors!" before any one took it up.

Then the landlord showed he understood.

"Ay, so say I!" he cried, with an oath. "Purveyors, indeed! It is such
as they give the Queen a bad name."

"God bless her!" quoth the monk loyally.

"And drown the purveyors!" a farmer exclaimed.

"They were here a year ago, and left us as bare as a shorn sheep,"
struck in a strapping villager, speaking at a white heat, but telling
me no news; for this was what I had heard at Towcester the night
before. "The Queen should lie warm if she uses all the wool they took!
And the pack-horses they purveyed to carry off the plunder--why, the
packmen avoid Stratford ever since as though we had the Black Death!
Oh, down with the purveyors, say I! The first that comes this way I
will show the bottom of the Ouse. Ay, that I will, though I hang for
it!"

"Easy! easy, Tom Miller!" the host interposed, affecting an air of
assurance, even while he cast an eye of trouble at his flitches. "It
will be another ten years before they harry us again. There is
Potter's Pury! They never took a tester's worth from Potter's Pury!
No, nor from Preston Gobion! But they will go to them next, depend
upon it!"

"I hope they will," I said, with a world of gloomy insinuation in my
words. "But I doubt it!"

And this time my hint was not wasted. The landlord changed color.
"What are you driving at, master?" he asked mildly, while the others
looked at me in silence and waited for more.

"What if there be one across the road now!" I said, giving way to the
temptation, and speaking falsely--for which I paid dearly afterward.
"A purveyor, I mean, unless I am mistaken in him, or he tells lies. He
has come straight from the Chancellor, white wand, warrant, and all.
He is taking his dinner now, but he has sent for the hundredman, so I
guess he means business."

"For the hundredman?" repeated the landlord, his brows meeting.

"Yes; unless I am mistaken."

There was silence for a moment. Then the man they called Tom Miller
dashed his cap on the floor and, folding his arms defiantly, looked
round on his neighbors. "He has come, has he!" he roared, his face
swollen, his eyes bloodshot. "Then I will be as good as my word! Who
will help? Shall we sit down and be shorn like sheep, as we were
before, so that our children lay on the bare stones, and we pulled the
plow ourselves? Or shall we show that we are free Englishmen, and not
slaves of Frenchmen? Shall we teach Master Purveyor not to trouble us
again? Now, what say you, neighbors?"

So fierce a growl of impatience and anger rose round me as at once
answered the question. A dozen red faces glared at me and at one
another, and from the very motion and passion of the men as they
snarled and threatened, the room seemed twice as full as it was. Their
oaths and cries of encouragement, not loud, but the more dangerous for
that, the fresh burst of fury which rose as the village smith and
another came in and learned the news, the menacing gestures of a score
of brandished fists--these sights, though they told of the very effect
at which I had aimed, scared as well as pleased me. I turned red and
white, and hesitated, fearing that I had gone too far.

The thing was done, however; and, what was more, I had soon to take
care of myself. At the very moment when the hubbub was at its loudest
I felt a chill run down my back as I met the monk's eye, and, reading
in it whimsical admiration, read in it something besides, and that was
an unmistakable menace. "Clever lad!" the eye said. "I will expose
you," it threatened.

I had forgotten him--or, at any rate, that my acting would be
transparent enough to him holding the clew in his hand--and his look
was like the shock of cold water to me. But it is wonderful how keen
the wits grow on the grindstone of necessity. With scarcely a second's
hesitation I drew out my only piece of gold, and unnoticed by the
other men, who were busy swearing at and encouraging one another, I
disclosed a morsel of it. The monk's crafty eye glistened. I laid my
finger on my lips.

He held up two fingers.

I shook my head and showed an empty palm. I had no more. He nodded;
and the relief that nod gave me was great. Before I had time, however,
to consider the narrowness of my escape, a movement of the crowd--for
the news had spread with strange swiftness, and there was now a crowd
assembled which more than filled the room--proclaimed that the
purveyor had come out, and was in the street.

The room was nearly emptied at a rush. Though I prudently remained
behind, I could, through the open window, hear as well as see what
passed. The leading spirits had naturally struggled out first, and
were gathered, sullen and full of dangerous possibilities, about the
porch.


I suppose the Bishop's messenger saw in them nothing but a crowd of
country clowns, for he came hectoring toward the door, smiting his
boot with his whip, and puffing out his red cheeks mightily. He felt
brave enough, now that he had dined and had at his back three stout
constables sworn to keep the Queen's peace.

"Make way! Make way, there, do you hear?" he cried in a husky, pompous
voice. "Make way!" he repeated, lightly touching the nearest man with
his switch. "I am on the Queen's service, boobies, and must not be
hindered."

The man swore at him, but did not budge, and the bully, brought up
thus sharply, awoke to the lowering faces and threatening looks which
confronted him. He changed color a little. But the ale was still in
him, and, forgetting his natural discretion, he thought to carry
matters with a high hand. "Come! come!" he exclaimed angrily. "I have
a warrant, and you resist me at your peril. I have to enter this
house. Clear the way, Master Hundredman, and break these fellows'
heads if they withstand you."

A growl as of a dozen bulldogs answered him, and he drew back, as a
child might who has trodden on an adder. "You fools!" he spluttered,
glaring at them viciously. "Are you mad? Do you know what you are
doing? Do you see this?" He whipped out from some pocket a short white
staff and brandished it. "I come direct from the Lord Chancellor and
upon his business, do you hear, and if you resist me it is treason.
Treason, you dogs!" he cried, his rage getting the better of him, "and
like dogs you will hang for it. Master Hundredman, I order you to take
in your constables and arrest that man!"

"What man?" quoth Tom Miller, eying him fixedly.

"The stranger who came in an hour ago, and is inside the house."

"Him, he means, who told about the purveyor across the road,"
explained the monk with a wink.

That wink sufficed. There was a roar of execration, and in the
twinkling of an eye the Jack-in-office, tripped up this way and shoved
that, was struggling helplessly in the grasp of half a dozen men, who
fought savagely for his body with the Hundredman and the constables.

"To the river! To the Ouse with him!" yelled the mob. "In the Queen's
name!" shouted the officers. But these were to those as three to a
score, and taken by surprise besides, and doubtful of the rights of
the matter. Yet for an instant, as the crowd went reeling and fighting
down the road, they prevailed; the constables managed to drag their
leader free, and I caught a glimpse of him, wild-eyed and frantic with
fear, his clothes torn from his back, standing at bay like some
animal, and brandishing his staff in one hand, a packet of letters in
the other.

"I have letters, letters of state!" he screamed shrilly. "Let me
alone, I tell you! Let me go, you curs!"

But in vain. The next instant the mob were upon him again. The packet
of letters went one way, the staff was dashed another. He was thrown
down and plucked up again, and hurried, bruised and struggling, toward
the river, his screams for mercy and furious threats rising shrilly
above the oaths and laughter.

I felt myself growing pale as scream followed scream. "They will kill
him!" I exclaimed trembling, and prepared to follow. "I cannot see
this done."

But the monk, who had returned to my side, grasped my arm. "Don't be a
fool," he said sharply. "I will answer for it they will not kill him.
Tom Miller is not a fool, though he is angry. He will duck him, and
let him go. But I will trouble you for that bit of gold, young
gentleman."

I gave it to him.

"Now," he continued with a leer, "I will give you a hint in return. If
you are wise, you will be out of this county in twelve hours. Tethered
to the gate over there is a good horse which belongs to a certain
purveyor now in the river. Take it! There is no one to say you nay.
And begone!"

I looked hard at him for a minute, my heart beating fast. This was
horse-stealing. And horse-stealing was a hanging matter. But I had
done so much already that I felt I might as well be hanged for a sheep
as for a lamb. I was not sure that I had not incited to treason, and
what was stealing a horse beside that? "I will do it!" I said
desperately.

"Don't lose time, then," quoth my mentor.

I went out then and there, and found he had told the truth. Every soul
in the place had gone to see the ducking, and the street was empty.
Kicked aside in the roadway lay the bundle of letters, soiled but not
torn, and in the gutter was the staff. I stooped and picked up one and
the other--in for a lamb, in for a sheep! and they might be useful
some day. Then I jumped into the saddle, and twitched the reins off
the hook.

But before I could drive in the spurs, a hand fell on the bridle, and
the monk's face appeared at my knee. "Well?" I said, glaring down at
him--I was burning to be away.

"That is a good cloak you have got there," he muttered hurriedly.
"There, strapped to the saddle, you fool. You do not want that, give
it me. Do you hear? Quick, give it me," he cried, raising his voice
and clutching at it fiercely, his face dark with greed and fear.

"I see," I replied, as I unstrapped it. "I am to steal the horse that
you may get the cloak. And then you will lay the lot on my shoulders.
Well, take it!" I cried, "and go your way as fast as you can."

Throwing it at him as hard as I could, I shook up the reins and went
off down the road at a gallop. The wind whistled pleasantly past my
ears. The sounds of the town grew faint and distant. Each bound of the
good hack carried me farther and farther from present danger, farther
and farther from the old life. In the exhilaration and excitement of
the moment I forgot my condition; forgot that I had not a penny-piece
in my pocket, and that I had left an unpaid bill behind me; forgot
even that I rode a--well, a borrowed horse.




                             CHAPTER IV.

                        TWO SISTERS OF MERCY.


A younger generation has often posed me finely by asking, "What, Sir
Francis! Did you not see _one_ bishop burned? Did you not know _one_
of the martyrs? Did you _never_ come face to face with Queen Mary?" To
all which questions I have one answer, No, and I watch small eyes grow
large with astonishment. But the truth is, a man can only be at one
place at a time. And though, in this very month of February, 1555,
Prebendary Rogers--a good, kindly man, as I have heard, who had a wife
and nine children--was burned in Smithfield in London for religion,
and the Bishop of Gloucester suffered in his own city, and other
inoffensive men were burned to death, and there was much talk of these
things, and in thousands of breasts a smoldering fire was kindled
which blazed high enough by and by--why, I was at Coton End, or on the
London Road, at the time, and learned such things only dimly and by
hearsay.

But the rill joins the river at last; and ofttimes suddenly and at a
bound, as it were. On this very day, while I cantered easily southward
with my face set toward St. Albans, Providence was at work shaping a
niche for me in the lives of certain people who were at the time as
unconscious of my existence as I was of theirs. In a great house in
the Barbican in London there was much stealthy going and coming on
this February afternoon and evening. Behind locked doors, and in fear
and trembling, mails were being packed and bags strapped, and fingers
almost too delicate for the task were busy with nails and hammers,
securing this and closing that. The packers knew nothing of me, nor I
of them. Yet but for me all that packing would have been of no avail;
and but for them my fate might have been very different. Still, the
sound of the hammer did not reach my ears, or, doing so, was covered
by the steady tramp of the roadster; and no vision, so far as I ever
heard, of a dusty youth riding Londonward came between the secret
workers and their task.

I had made up my mind to sleep at St. Albans that night, and for this
reason, and for others relating to the Sheriff of Buckinghamshire, in
which county Stony Stratford lies, I pushed on briskly. I presently
found time, however, to examine the packet of letters of which I had
made spoil. On the outer wrapper I found there was no address, only an
exhortation to be speedy. Off this came, therefore, without ceremony,
and was left in the dirt. Inside I found two sealed epistles, each
countersigned on the wrapper, "Stephen Winton."

"Ho! ho!" said I. "I did well to take them."

Over the signature on the first letter--it seemed to be written on
parchment--were the words, "Haste! haste! haste!" This was the thicker
and heavier of the two, and was addressed to Sir Maurice Berkeley, at
St. Mary Overy's, Southwark, London. I turned it over and over in my
hands, and peeped into it, hesitating. Twice I muttered, "All is fair
in love and war!" And at last, with curiosity fully awake, and a
glance behind me to make sure that the act was unobserved, I broke the
seal. The document proved to be as short and pithy as it was
startling. It was an order commanding Sir Maurice Berkeley forthwith
in the Queen's name, and by the authority of the Council, and so on,
and so on, to arrest Katherine Willoughby de Eresby, Duchess of
Suffolk, and to deliver her into the custody of the Lieutenant of the
Tower, "These presents to be his waranty for the detention of the said
Duchess of Suffolk until her Grace's pleasure in the matter be known."

When it was too late I trembled to think what I had done. To meddle
with matters of state might be more dangerous a hundred times than
stealing horses, or even than ducking the Chancellor's messenger!
Seeing at this moment a party of travelers approach, I crammed the
letter into my pocket, and rode by them with a red face, and a tongue
that stuttered so feebly that I could scarcely return their greetings.
When they had gone by I pulled out the warrant again, having it in my
mind to tear it up without a moment's delay--to tear it into the
smallest morsels, and so get rid of a thing most dangerous. But the
great red seal dangling at the foot of the parchment caught my eye,
and I paused to think. It was so red, so large, so imposing, it seemed
a pity to destroy it. It must surely be good for something. I folded
up the warrant again, and put it away in my safest pocket. Yes, it
might be good for something.

I took out the other letter. It was bound with green ribbon and sealed
with extreme care, being directed simply to Mistress Clarence--there
was no address. But over Gardiner's signature on the wrapper were the
words, "These, on your peril, very privately."

I turned it over and over, and said the same thing about love and war,
and even repeated to myself my old proverb about a sheep and a lamb.
But somehow I could not do it. The letter was a woman's letter; the
secret, her secret; and though my fingers itched as they hovered about
the seals, my cheek tingled too. So at last, with a muttered, "What
would Petronilla say?" I put it away unopened in the pocket where the
warrant lay. The odds were immense that Mistress Clarence would never
get it; but at least her secret should remain hers, my honor mine!


It was dark when I rode, thoroughly jaded, into St. Albans. I was
splashed with mud up to the waist and wetted by a shower, and looked,
I have no doubt, from the effect of my journeying on foot and
horseback, as disreputable a fellow as might be. The consciousness too
that I was without a penny, and the fear lest, careful as I had been
to let no one outsrip me, the news of the riot at Stratford might have
arrived, did not tend to give me assurance. I poked my head timidly
into the great room, hoping that I might have it to myself. To my
disgust it was full of people. Half-a-dozen travelers and as many
townsfolk were sitting round the fire, talking briskly over their
evening draught. Yet I had no choice. I was hungry, and the thing had
to be done, and I swaggered in, something of the sneak, no doubt,
peeping through my bravado. I remarked, as I took my seat by the fire
and set to drying myself, that I was greeted by a momentary silence,
and that two or three of the company began to eye me suspiciously.

There was one man, who sat on the settle in the warmest corner of the
chimney, who seemed in particular to resent my damp neighborhood. His
companions treated him with so much reverence, and he snubbed them so
regularly, that I wondered who he was; and presently, listening to the
conversation which went on round me, I had my curiosity satisfied. He
was no less a personage than the Bailiff of St. Albans, and his manner
befitted such a man; for it seemed to indicate that he thought himself
heir to all the powers of the old Abbots under whose broad thumb his
father and grandfather had groaned.

My conscience pricking me, I felt some misgiving when I saw him, after
staring at me and whispering to two or three of his neighbors, beckon
the landlord aside. His big round face and burly figure gave him a
general likeness to bluff King Hal and he appeared to be aware of this
himself, and to be inclined to ape the stout king's ways, which, I
have heard my uncle say, were ever ways heavy for others' toes. For a
while, however, seeing my supper come in, I forgot him. The bare-armed
girl who brought it to me, and in whom my draggled condition seemed to
provoke feelings of a different nature, lugged up a round table to the
fire. On this she laid my meal, not scrupling to set aside some of the
snug dry townsfolk. Then she set a chair for me well in the blaze, and
folding her arms in her apron stood to watch me fall to. I did so with
a will, and with each mouthful of beef and draught of ale, spirit and
strength came back to me. The cits round me might sneer and shake
their heads, and the travelers smile at my appetite. In five minutes I
cared not a whit! I could give them back joke for joke, and laugh with
the best of them.

Indeed, I had clean forgotten the Bailiff, when he stalked back to his
place. But the moment our eyes met, I guessed there was trouble afoot.
The landlord came with him and stood looking at me, sending off the
wench with a flea in her ear; and I felt under his eye an
uncomfortable consciousness that my purse was empty. Two or three late
arrivals, to whom I suppose Master Bailiff had confided his
suspicions, took their stand also in a half-circle and scanned me
queerly. Altogether it struck me suddenly that I was in a tight place,
and had need of my wits.

"Ahem!" said the Bailiff abruptly, taking skillful advantage of a lull
in the talk. "Where from last, young man?" He spoke in a deep choky
voice, and, if I was not mistaken, he winked one of his small eyes in
the direction of his friends, as though to say, "Now see me pose him!"

But I only put another morsel in my mouth. For a moment indeed the
temptation to reply "Towcester," seeing that such a journey over a
middling road was something to brag of before the Highway Law came in,
almost overcame me. But in time I bethought me of Stephen Gardiner's
maxim, "Be slow to speak!" and I put another morsel in my mouth.

The Bailiff's face grew red, or rather, redder. "Come, young man, did
you hear me speak?" he said pompously. "Where from last?"

"From the road, sir," I replied, turning to him as if I had not heard
him before. "And a very wet road it was."

A man who sat next me chuckled, being apparently a stranger like
myself. But the Bailiff puffed himself into a still more striking
likeness to King Henry, and including him in his scowl shouted at me,
"Sirrah! don't bandy words with me! Which way did you come along the
road, I asked."

It was on the tip of my tongue to answer saucily, "The right way!" But
I reflected that I might be stopped; and to be stopped might mean to
be hanged at worst, and something very unpleasant at best. So I
controlled myself, and answered--though the man's arrogance was
provoking enough--"I have come from Stratford, and I am going to
London. Now you know as much as I do."

"Do I?" he said, with a sneer and a wink at the landlord.

"Yes, I think so," I answered patiently.

"Well, I don't!" he retorted, in vulgar triumph. "I don't. It is my
opinion that you have come from London."

I went on with my supper.

"Do you hear?" he asked pompously, sticking his arms akimbo and
looking round for sympathy. "You will have to give an account of
yourself, young man. We will have no penniless rogues and sturdy
vagabonds wandering about St. Albans."

"Penniless rogues do not go a-horseback," I answered. But it was
wonderful how my spirits sank again under that word "penniless." It
hit me hard.

"Wait a bit," he said, raising his finger to command attention for his
next question. "What is your religion, young man?"

"Oh!" I replied, putting down my knife and looking open scorn at him,
"you are an inquisitor, are you?" At which words of mine there was a
kind of stir. "You would burn me as I hear they burned Master Sandars
at Coventry last week, would you? They were talking about it down the
road."

"You will come to a bad end, young man!" he retorted viciously, his
outstretched finger shaking as if the palsy had seized him. For this
time my taunt had gone home, and more than one of the listeners
standing on the outer edge of the group, and so beyond his ken, had
muttered "shame." More than one face had grown dark. "You will come to
a bad end!" he repeated. "If it be not here, then somewhere else! It
is my opinion that you have come from London, and that you have been
in trouble. There is a hue-and-cry out for a young fellow just your
age, and a cock of your hackle, I judge, who is wanted for heresy. A
Londoner too. You do not leave here until you have given an account of
yourself, Master Jack-a-Dandy!" The party had all risen round me, and
some of the hindmost had got on benches to see me the better. Among
these, between two bacon flitches, I caught a glimpse of the
serving-maid's face as she peered at me, pale and scared, and a queer
impulse led me to nod to her--a reassuring little nod. I found myself
growing cool and confident, seeing myself so cornered.

"Easy! easy!" I said, "let a man finish his supper and get warmed in
peace."

"Bishop Bonner will warm you!" cried the Bailiff.

"I dare say--as they warm people in Spain!" I sneered.

"He will be Bishop Burner to you!" shrieked the Bailiff, almost beside
himself with rage at being so bearded by a lad.

"Take care!" I retorted. "Do not you speak evil of dignitaries, or you
will be getting into trouble!"

He fairly writhed under this rejoinder.

"Landlord!" he spluttered. "I shall hold you responsible! If this
person leaves your house, and is not forthcoming when wanted, you will
suffer for it!"

The landlord scratched his head, being a good-natured fellow; but a
bailiff is a bailiff, especially at St. Albans. And I was muddy and
travel-stained, and quick of my tongue for one so young; which the
middle-aged never like, though the old bear it better. He hesitated.

"Do not be a fool, Master Host!" I said. "I have something
here----" and I touched my pocket, which happened to be near my
sword-hilt--"that will make you rue it if you interfere with me!"

"Ho! ho!" cried the Bailiff, in haste and triumph. "So that is his
tone! We have a tavern-brawler here, have we! A young swashbuckler!
His tongue will not run so fast when he finds his feet in the stocks.
Master landlord, call the watch! Call the watch at once, I command
you!"

"You will do so at your peril!" I said sternly. Then, seeing that my
manner had some effect upon all save the angry official, I gave way to
the temptation to drive the matter home and secure my safety by the
only means that seemed possible. It is an old story that one deception
leads inevitably to another. I solemnly drew out the white staff I had
taken from the apparitor. "Look here!" I continued, waving it. "Do you
see this, you booby? I am traveling in the Queen's name, and on her
service. By special commission, too, from the Chancellor! Is that
plain speaking enough for you? And let me tell you, Master Bailiff," I
added, fixing my eye upon him, "that my business is private, and that
my Lord of Winchester will not be best pleased when he hears how I
have had to declare myself. Do you think the Queen's servants go
always in cloth of gold, you fool? The stocks indeed!"

I laughed out loudly and without effort, for there never was anything
so absurd as the change in the Bailiff's visage. His color fled, his
cheeks grew pendulous, his lip hung loose. He stared at me, gasping
like a fish out of water, and seemed unable to move toe or finger. The
rest enjoyed the scene, as people will enjoy a marvelous sudden stroke
of fortune. It was as good as a stage pageant to them. They could not
take their eyes from the pocket in which I had replaced my wand, and
continued, long after I had returned to my meal, to gaze at me in
respectful silence. The crestfallen Bailiff presently slipped out, and
I was left cock of the walk, and for the rest of the evening enjoyed
the fruits of victory.

They proved to be more substantial than I had expected, for, as I was
on my way upstairs to bed, the landlord preceding me with a light, a
man accosted me, and beckoned me aside mysteriously.

"The Bailiff is very much annoyed," he said, speaking in a muffled
voice behind his hand, while his eyes peered into mine.

"Well, what is that to me?" I replied, looking sternly at him. I was
tired and sleepy after my meal. "He should not make such a fool of
himself."

"Tut, tut, tut, tut! You misunderstood me, young sir," the man
answered, plucking my sleeve as I turned away. "He regrets the
annoyance he has caused you. A mistake, he says, a pure mistake, and
he hopes you will have forgotten it by morning." Then, with a skillful
hand, which seemed not unused to the task, he slid two coins into my
palm. I looked at them, for a moment not perceiving his drift. Then I
found they were two gold angels, and I began to understand. "Ahem!" I
said, fingering them uneasily. "Yes. Well, well, I will look over it,
I will look over it! Tell him from me," I continued, gaining
confidence as I proceeded with my new rle, "that he shall hear no
more about it. He is zealous--perhaps over zealous!"

"That is it!" muttered the envoy eagerly; "that is it, my dear sir!
You see perfectly how it is. He is zealous. Zealous in the Queen's
service!"

"To be sure; and so I will report him. Tell him that so I will report
him. And here, my good friend, take one of these for yourself," I
added, magnificently giving him back half my fortune--young donkey
that I was. "Drink to the Queen's health; and so good-night to you."

He went away, bowing to the very ground, and, when the landlord
likewise had left me, I was very merry over this, being in no mood for
weighing words. The world seemed--to be sure, the ale was humming in
my head, and I was in the landlord's best room--easy enough to
conquer, provided one possessed a white staff. The fact that I had no
right to mine only added--be it remembered I was young and foolish--to
my enjoyment of its power. I went to bed in all comfort with it under
my pillow, and slept soundly, untroubled by any dream of a mischance.
But when did a lie ever help a man in the end?


When I awoke, which I seemed to do on a sudden, it was still dark. I
wondered for a moment where I was, and what was the meaning of the
shouting and knocking I heard. Then, discerning the faint outline of
the window, I remembered the place in which I had gone to bed, and I
sat up and listened. Some one--nay, several people--were drumming and
kicking against the wooden doors of the inn-yard, and shouting
besides, loud enough to raise the dead. In the next room to mine I
caught the grumbling voices of persons disturbed, like myself, from
sleep. And by and by a window was opened, and I heard the landlord ask
what was the matter.

"In the Queen's name!" came the loud, impatient answer, given in a
voice that rose above the ring of bridles and the stamping of iron
hoofs, "open! and that quickly, Master Host. The watch are here, and
we must search."

I waited to hear no more. I was out of bed, and huddling on my
clothes, and thrusting my feet into my boots, like one possessed. My
heart was beating as fast as if I had been running in a race, and my
hands were shaking with the shock of the alarm. The impatient voice
without was Master Pritchard's, and it rang with all the vengeful
passion which I should have expected that gentleman, duped, ducked,
and robbed, to be feeling. There would be little mercy to be had at
his hands. Moreover, my ears, grown as keen for the moment as the
hunted hare's, distinguished the tramping of at least half-a-dozen
horses, so that it was clear that he had come with a force at his
back. Resistance would be useless. My sole chance lay in flight--if
flight should still be possible.

Even in my haste I did not forsake the talisman which had served me so
well, but stayed an instant to thrust it into my pocket. The Cluddes
have, I fancy, a knack of keeping cool in emergencies, getting,
indeed, the cooler the greater the stress.

By this time the inn was thoroughly aroused. Doors were opening and
shutting on all sides of me, and questions were being shouted in
different tones from room to room. In the midst of the hubbub I heard
the landlord come out muttering, and go downstairs to open the door.
Instantly I unlatched mine, slipped through it stealthily, sneaked a
step or two down the passage, and then came plump in the dark against
some one who was moving as softly as myself. The surprise was
complete, and I should have cried out at the unexpected collision, had
not the unknown laid a cold hand on my mouth, and gently pushed me
back into my room.

Here there was now a faint glimmer of dawn, and by this I saw that my
companion was the serving-maid. "Hist!" she said, speaking under her
breath, "Is it you they want?"

I nodded.

"I thought so," she muttered. "Then you must get out through your
window. You cannot pass them. They are a dozen or more, and armed.
Quick! knot this about the bars. It is no great depth to the bottom,
and the ground is soft from the rain."

She tore, as she spoke, the coverlet from the bed, and, twisting it
into a kind of rope, helped me to secure one corner of it about the
window-bar. "When you are down," she whispered, "keep along the wall
to the right until you come to a haystack. Turn to the left there--you
will have to ford the water--and you will soon be clear of the town.
Look about you then, and you will see a horse-track, which leads to
Elstree, running in a line with the London Road, but a mile from it
and through woods. At Elstree any path to the left will take you to
Barnet, and not two miles lost."

"Heaven bless you!" I said, turning from the gloom, the dark sky, and
driving scud without to peer gratefully at her. "Heaven bless you for
a good woman!"

"And God keep you for a bonny boy," she whispered.

I kissed her, forcing into her hands--a thing the remembrance of which
is very pleasant to me to this day--my last piece of gold.


A moment more, and I stood unhurt, but almost up to my knees in mud,
in an alley bounded on both sides, as far as I could see, by blind
walls. Stopping only to indicate by a low whistle that I was safe, I
turned and sped away as fast as I could run in the direction which she
had pointed out. There was no one abroad, and in a shorter time than I
had expected I found myself outside the town, traveling over a kind of
moorland tract bounded in the distance by woods.

Here I picked up the horse-track easily enough, and without stopping,
save for a short breathing space, hurried along it, to gain the
shelter of the trees. So far so good! I had reason to be thankful. But
my case was still an indifferent one. More than once in getting out of
the town I had slipped and fallen. I was wet through, and plastered
with dirt owing to these mishaps; and my clothes were in a woeful
plight. For a time excitement kept me up, however, and I made good
way, warmed by the thought that I had again baffled the great Bishop.
It was only when the day had come, and grown on to noon, and I saw no
sign of any pursuers, that thought got the upper hand. Then I began to
compare, with some bitterness of feeling, my present condition--wet,
dirty, and homeless--with that which I had enjoyed only a week before;
and it needed all my courage to support me. Skulking, half famished,
between Barnet and Tottenham, often compelled to crouch in ditches or
behind walls while travelers went by, and liable each instant to have
to leave the highway and take to my heels, I had leisure to feel; and
I did feel, more keenly, I think, that afternoon than at any later
time, the bitterness of fortune. I cursed Stephen Gardiner a dozen
times, and dared not let my thoughts wander to my father. I had said
that I would build my house afresh. Well, truly I was building it from
the foundation.

It added very much to my misery that it rained all day a cold,
half-frozen rain. The whole afternoon I spent in hiding, shivering and
shaking in a hole under a ledge near Tottenham; being afraid to go
into London before nightfall, lest I should be waited for at the gate
and be captured. Chilled and bedraggled as I was, and weak through
want of food which I dared not go out to beg, the terrors of capture
got hold of my mind and presented to me one by one every horrible form
of humiliation, the stocks, the pillory, the cart-tail; so that even
Master Pritchard, could he have seen me and known my mind, might have
pitied me; so that I loathe to this day the hours I spent in that foul
hiding-place. Between a man's best and worse, there is little but a
platter of food.

The way this was put an end to, I well remember. An old woman came
into the field where I lay hid, to drive home a cow. I had had my eyes
on this cow for at least an hour, having made up my mind to milk it
for my own benefit as soon as the dusk fell. In my disappointment at
seeing it driven off, and also out of a desire to learn whether the
old dame might not be going to milk it in a corner of the pasture, in
which case I might still get an after taste, I crawled so far out of
my hole that, turning suddenly, she caught sight of me. I expected to
see her hurry off, but she did not. She took a long look, and then
came back toward me, making, however, as it seemed to me, as if she
did not see me. When she had come within a few feet of me, she looked
down abruptly, and our eyes met. What she saw in mine I can only
guess. In hers I read a divine pity. "Oh, poor lad!" she murmured;
"oh, you poor, poor lad!" and there were tears in her voice.

I was so weak--it was almost twenty-four hours since I had tasted
food, and I had come twenty-four miles in the time--that at that I
broke down, and cried like a child.

I learned later that the old woman took me for just the same person
for whom the Bailiff at St. Albans had mistaken me, a young apprentice
named Hunter, who had got into trouble about religion, and was at this
time hiding up and down the country; Bishop Bonner having clapped his
father into jail until the son should come to hand. But her kind heart
knew no distinction of creeds. She took me to her cottage as soon as
night fell, and warmed, and dried, and fed me. She did not dare to
keep me under her roof for longer than an hour or two, neither would I
have stayed to endanger her. But she sent me out a new man, with a
crust, moreover, in my pocket. A hundred times between Tottenham and
Aldersgate I said "God bless her!" And I say so now.

So twice in one day, and that the gloomiest day of my life, I was
succored by a woman. I have never forgotten it. I have tried to keep
it always in mind; remembering too a saying of my uncle's, that "there
is nothing on earth so merciful as a good woman, or so pitiless as a
bad one!"




                              CHAPTER V.

                          MISTRESS BERTRAM.


"Ding! ding! ding! Aid ye the poor! Pray for the dead! Five o'clock and
a murky morning."

The noise of the bell, and the cry which accompanied it, roused me
from my first sleep in London, and that with a vengeance; the bell
being rung and the words uttered within three feet of my head. Where
did I sleep, then? Well, I had found a cozy resting-place behind some
boards which stood propped against the wall of a baker's oven in a
street near Moorgate. The wall was warm and smelt of new bread, and
another besides myself had discovered its advantages. This was the
watchman, who had slumbered away most of his vigil cheek by jowl with
me, but, morning approaching, had roused himself, and before he was
well out of his bed, certainly before he had left his bedroom, had
begun--the ungrateful wretch--to prove his watchfulness by disturbing
every one else.

I sat up and rubbed my eyes, grinding my shoulders well against the
wall for warmth. I had no need to turn out yet, but I began to think,
and the more I thought the harder I stared at the planks six inches
before my nose. My thoughts turned upon a very knotty point; one that
I had never seriously considered before. What was I going to do next?
How was I going to live or to rear the new house of which I have made
mention? Hitherto I had aimed simply at reaching London. London had
paraded itself before my mind--though my mind should have known
better--not as a town of cold streets and dreary alleys and shops open
from seven to four with perhaps here and there a vacant place for an
apprentice; but as a gilded city of adventure and romance, in which a
young man of enterprise, whether he wanted to go abroad or to rise at
home, might be sure of finding his sword weighed, priced, and bought
up on the instant, and himself valued at his own standard.

But London reached, the hoarding in Moorgate reached, and five o'clock
in the morning reached, somehow these visions faded rapidly. In the
cold reality left to me I felt myself astray. If I would stay at home,
who was going to employ me? To whom should I apply? What patron had I?
Or if I would go abroad, how was I to set about it? how find a vessel,
seeing that I might expect to be arrested the moment I showed my face
in daylight?

Here all my experience failed me. I did not know what to do, though
the time had come for action, and I must do or starve. It had been all
very well when I was at Coton, to propose that I would go up to
London, and get across the water--such had been my dim notion--to the
Courtenays and Killigrews, who, with other refugees, Protestants for
the most part, were lying on the French coast, waiting for better
times. But now that I was in London, and as good as an outlaw myself,
I saw no means of going to them. I seemed farther from my goal than I
had been in Warwickshire.

Thinking very blankly over this I began to munch the piece of bread
which I owed to the old dame at Tottenham; and had solemnly got
through half of it, when the sound of rapid footsteps--the footsteps
of women, I judged from the lightness of the tread--caused me to hold
my hand and listen. Whoever they were--and I wondered, for it was
still early, and I had heard no one pass since the watchman left
me--they came to a stand in front of my shelter, and one of them
spoke. Her words made me start; unmistakably the voice was a
gentlewoman's, such as I had not heard for almost a week. And at this
place and hour, on the raw borderland of day and night, a gentlewoman
was the last person I expected to light upon. Yet if the speaker were
not some one of station, Petronilla's lessons had been thrown away
upon me.

The words were uttered in a low voice; but the planks in front of me
were thin, and the speaker was actually leaning against them. I caught
every accent of what seemed to be the answer to a question. "Yes, yes!
It is all right!" she said, a covert ring of impatience in her tone.
"Take breath a moment. I do not see him now."

"Thank Heaven!" muttered another voice. As I had fancied, there were
two persons. The latter speaker's tone smacked equally of breeding
with the former's, but was rounder and fuller, and more masterful; and
she appeared to be out of breath. "Then perhaps we have thrown him off
the trail," she continued, after a short pause, in which she seemed to
have somewhat recovered herself. "I distrusted him from the first,
Anne--from the first. Yet, do you know, I never feared him as I did
Master Clarence; and as it was too much to hope that we should be rid
of both at once--they took good care of that--why, the attempt had to
be made while he was at home. But I always felt he was a spy."

"Who? Master Clarence?" asked she who had spoken first.

"Ay, he certainly. But I did not mean him, I meant Philip."

"Well, I--I said at first, you remember, that it was a foolhardy
enterprise, mistress!"

"Tut, tut, girl!" quoth the other tartly--this time the impatience lay
with her, and she took no pains to conceal it--"we are not beaten yet.
Come, look about! Cannot you remember where we are, nor which way the
river should be? If the dawn were come, we could tell."

"But with the dawn----"

"The streets would fill. True, and, Master Philip giving the alarm, we
should be detected before we had gone far. The more need, girl, to
lose no time. I have my breath again, and the child is asleep. Let us
venture one way or the other, and Heaven grant it be the right one!"

"Let me see," the younger woman answered slowly, as if in doubt. "Did
we come by the church? No; we came the other way. Let us try this
turning, then."

"Why, child, we came that way," was the decided answer. "What are you
thinking of? That would take us straight back into his arms, the
wretch! Come, come! you loiter," continued this, the more masculine
speaker, "and a minute may make all the difference between a prison
and freedom. If we can reach the Lion Wharf by seven--it is like to be
a dark morning and foggy--we may still escape before Master Philip
brings the watch upon us."

They moved briskly away as she spoke, and her words were already
growing indistinct from distance, while I remained still, idly seeking
the clew to their talk and muttering over and over again the name
Clarence, which seemed familiar to me, when a cry of alarm, in which I
recognized one of their voices, cut short my reverie. I crawled with
all speed from my shelter, and stood up, being still in a line with
the boards, and not easily distinguishable. As she had said, it was a
dark morning; but the roofs of the houses--now high, now low--could be
plainly discerned against a gray, drifting sky wherein the first signs
of dawn were visible; and the blank outlines of the streets, which met
at this point, could be seen. Six or seven yards from me, in the
middle of the roadway, stood three dusky figures, of whom I judged the
nearer, from their attitudes, to be the two women. The farthest seemed
to be a man.

I was astonished to see that he was standing cap in hand; nay, I was
disgusted as well, for I had crept out hot-fisted, expecting to be
called upon to defend the women. But, despite the cry I had heard,
they were talking to him quietly enough, as far as I could hear. And
in a minute or so I saw the taller woman give him something.

He took it with a low bow, and appeared almost to sweep the dirt with
his bonnet. She waved her hand in dismissal, and he stood back still
uncovered. And--hey, presto! the women tripped swiftly away.

By this time my curiosity was intensely excited, but for a moment I
thought it was doomed to disappointment. I thought that it was all
over. It was not, by any means. The man stood looking after them until
they reached the corner, and the moment they had passed it, he
followed. His stealthy manner of going, and his fashion of peering
after them, was enough for me. I guessed at once that he was dogging
them, following them unknown to them and against their will; and with
considerable elation I started after him, using the same precautions.
What was sauce for the geese was sauce for the gander! So we went,
two--one--one, slipping after one another through half a dozen dark
streets, tending generally southward.

Following him in this way I seldom caught a glimpse of the women. The
man kept at a considerable distance behind them, and I had my
attention fixed on him. But once or twice, when, turning a corner, I
all but trod on his heels, I saw them; and presently an odd point
about them struck me. There was a white kerchief or something attached
apparently to the back of the one's cloak, which considerably assisted
my stealthy friend to keep them in view. It puzzled me. Was it a
signal to him? Was he really all the time acting in concert with them;
and was I throwing away my pains? Or was the white object which so
betrayed them merely the result of carelessness, and the lack of
foresight of women grappling with a condition of things to which they
were unaccustomed? Of course I could not decide this, the more as, at
that distance, I failed to distinguish what the white something was,
or even which of the two wore it.

Presently I got a clew to our position, for we crossed Cheapside close
to Paul's Cross, which my childish memories of the town enabled me to
recognize, even by that light. Here my friend looked up and down, and
hung a minute on his heel before he followed the women, as if
expecting or looking for some one. It might be that he was trying to
make certain that the watch were not in sight. They were not, at any
rate. Probably they had gone home to bed, for the morning was growing.
And, after a momentary hesitation, he plunged into the narrow street
down which the women had flitted.

He had only gone a few yards when I heard him cry out. The next
instant, almost running against him myself, I saw what had happened.
The women had craftily lain in wait for him in the little court into
which the street ran and had caught him as neatly as could be. When I
came upon them the taller woman was standing at bay with a passion
that was almost fury in her pose and gesture. Her face, from which the
hood of a coarse cloak had fallen back, was pale with anger; her gray
eyes flashed, her teeth glimmered. Seeing her thus, and seeing the
burden she carried under her cloak--which instinct told me was her
child--I thought of a tigress brought to bay.

"You lying knave!" she hissed. "You Judas!"

The man recoiled a couple of paces, and in recoiling nearly touched
me.

"What would you?" she continued. "What do you want? What would you do?
You have been paid to go. Go, and leave us!"

"I dare not," he muttered, keeping away from her as if he dreaded a
blow. She looked a woman who could deal a blow, a woman who could both
love and hate fiercely and openly--as proud and frank and haughty a
lady as I had ever seen in my life. "I dare not," he muttered
sullenly; "I have my orders."

"Oh!" she cried, with scorn. "You have your orders, have you! The
murder is out. But from whom, sirrah? Whose orders are to supersede
mine? I would King Harry were alive, and I would have you whipped to
Tyburn. Speak, rogue; who bade you follow me?"

He shook his head.

She looked about her wildly, passionately, and I saw that she was at
her wits' end what to do, or how to escape him. But she was a woman.
When she next spoke there was a marvelous change in her. Her face had
grown soft, her voice low. "Philip," she said gently, "the purse was
light. I will give you more. I will give you treble the amount within
a few weeks, and I will thank you on my knees, and my husband shall be
such a friend to you as you have never dreamed of, if you will only go
home and be silent. Only that--or, better still, walk the streets an
hour, and then report that you lost sight of us. Think, man, think!"
she cried with energy--"the times may change. A little more, and Wyatt
had been master of London last year. Now the people are fuller of
discontent than ever, and these burnings and torturings, these
Spaniards in the streets--England will not endure them long. The times
will change. Let us go, and you will have a friend--when most you need
one."

He shook his head sullenly. "I dare not do it," he said. And somehow I
got the idea that he was telling the truth, and that it was not the
man's stubborn nature only that withstood the bribe and the plea. He
spoke as if he were repeating a lesson and the master were present.

When she saw that she could not move him, the anger, which I think
came more naturally to her, broke out afresh. "You will not, you
hound!" she cried. "Will neither threats nor promises move you?"

"Neither," he answered doggedly; "I have my orders."

So far, I had remained a quiet listener, standing in the mouth of the
lane which opened upon the court where they were. The women had taken
no notice of me; either because they did not see me, or because,
seeing me, they thought that I was a hanger-on of the man before them.
And he, having his back to me, and his eyes on them, could not see me.
It was a surprise to him--a very great surprise, I think--when I took
three steps forward, and gripped him by the scruff of his neck.

"You have your orders, have you?" I muttered in his ear, as I shook
him to and fro, while the taller woman started back and the younger
uttered a cry of alarm at my sudden appearance. "Well, you will not
obey them. Do you hear? Your employer may go hang! You will do just
what these ladies please to ask of you."

He struggled an instant; but he was an undersized man, and he could
not loosen the hold which I had secured at my leisure. Then I noticed
his hand going to his girdle in a suspicious way. "Stop that!" I said,
flashing before his eyes a short, broad blade, which had cut many a
deer's throat in Old Arden Forest. "You had better keep quiet, or it
will be the worse for you! Now, mistress," I continued, "you can
dispose of this little man as you please."

"Who are you?" she said, after a pause; during which she had stared at
me in open astonishment. No doubt I was a wild-looking figure.

"A friend," I replied. "Or one who would be such. I saw this fellow
follow you, and I followed him. For the last five minutes I have been
listening to your talk. He was not amenable to reason then, but I
think he will be now. What shall I do with him?"

She smiled faintly, but did not answer at once, the coolness and
resolution with which she had faced him before failing her now,
possibly in sheer astonishment, or because my appearance at her side,
by removing the strain, sapped the strength. "I do not know," she said
at length, in a vague, puzzled tone.

"Well," I answered, "you are going to the Lion Wharf, and----"

"Oh, you fool!" she screamed out loud. "Oh, you fool!" she repeated
bitterly. "Now you have told him all."

I stood confounded. My cheeks burned with shame, and her look of
contempt cut me like a knife. That the reproach was deserved I knew at
once, for the man in my grasp gave a start, which proved that the
information was not lost upon him. "Who told you?" the woman went on,
clutching the child jealously to her breast, as though she saw herself
menaced afresh. "Who told you about the Lion Wharf?"

"Never mind," I answered gloomily. "I have made a mistake, but it is
easy to remedy it." And I took out my knife again. "Do you go on and
leave us."

I hardly know whether I meant my threat or no. But my prisoner had no
doubts. He shrieked out--a wild cry of fear which rang round the empty
court--and by a rapid blow, despair giving him courage, he dashed the
hunting-knife from my hand. This done he first flung himself on me,
then tried by a sudden jerk to free himself. In a moment we were down
on the stones, and tumbling over one another in the dirt, while he
struggled to reach his knife, which was still in his girdle, and I
strove to prevent him. The fight was sharp, but it lasted barely a
minute. When the first effort of his despair was spent, I came
uppermost, and he was but a child in my hands. Presently, with my knee
on his chest, I looked up. The women were still there, the younger
clinging to the other.

"Go! go!" I cried impatiently. Each second I expected the court to be
invaded, for the man had screamed more than once.

But they hesitated. I had been forced to hurt him a little, and he was
moaning piteously. "Who are you?" the elder woman asked--she who had
spoken all through.

"Nay, never mind that!" I answered. "Do you go! Go, while you can. You
know the way to the Wharf."

"Yes," she answered. "But I cannot go and leave him at your mercy.
Remember he is a man, and has----"

"He is a treacherous scoundrel," I answered, giving his throat a
squeeze. "But he shall have one more chance. Listen, sirrah!" I
continued to the man, "and stop that noise or I will knock out your
teeth with my dagger-hilt. Listen and be silent. I shall go with these
ladies, and I promise you this: If they are stopped or hindered on
their way, or if evil happen to them at that wharf, whose name you had
better forget, it will be the worse for you. Do you hear? You will
suffer for it, though there be a dozen guards about you! Mind you," I
added, "I have nothing to lose myself, for I am desperate already."

He vowed--the poor craven--with his stuttering tongue, that he would
be true, and vowed it again and again. But I saw that his eyes did not
meet mine. They glanced instead at the knife-blade, and I knew, even
while I pretended to trust him, that he would betray us. My real hope
lay in his fears, and in this, that as the fugitives knew the way to
the wharf, and it could not now be far distant, we might reach it,
and go on board some vessel--I had gathered they were flying the
country--before this wretch could recover himself and get together a
force to stop us. That was my real hope, and in that hope only I left
him.

We went as fast as the women could walk. I did not trouble them with
questions; indeed, I had myself no more leisure than enabled me to
notice their general appearance, which was that of comfortable
tradesmen's womenfolk. Their cloaks and hoods were plainly fashioned,
and of coarse stuff, their shoes were thick, and no jewel or scrap of
lace, peeping out, betrayed them. Yet there was something in their
carriage which could not be hidden, something which, to my eye, told
tales; so that minute by minute I became more sure that this was
really an adventure worth pursuing, and that London had kept a reward
in store for me besides its cold stones and inhospitable streets.

The city was beginning to rouse itself. As we flitted through the
lanes and alleys which lie between Cheapside and the river, we met
many people, chiefly of the lower classes, on their way to work. Yet
in spite of this, we had no need to fear observation, for, though the
morning was fully come, with the light had arrived such a thick,
choking, yellow fog as I, being for the most part country-bred, had
never experienced. It was so dense and blinding that we had a
difficulty in keeping together, and even hand in hand could scarcely
see one another. In my wonder how my companions found their way, I
presently failed to notice their condition, and only remarked the
distress and exhaustion which one of them was suffering, when she
began, notwithstanding all her efforts, to lag behind. Then I sprang
forward, blaming myself much. "Forgive me," I said. "You are tired,
and no wonder. Let me carry the child, mistress."

Exhausted as she was, she drew away from me jealously.

"No," she panted. "We are nearly there. I am better now." And she
strained the child closer to her, as though she feared I might take it
from her by force.

"Well, if you will not trust me," I answered, "let your friend carry
it for a time. I can see you are tired out."

Through the mist she bent forward, and peered into my face, her eyes
scarcely a foot from mine. The scrutiny seemed to satisfy her. She
drew a long breath and held out her burden. "No," she said; "you shall
take him. I will trust you."

I took the little wrapped-up thing as gently as I could. "You shall
not repent it, if I can help it, Mistress----"

"Bertram," she said.

"Mistress Bertram," I repeated. "Now let us get on and lose no time."

A walk of a hundred yards or so brought us clear of the houses, and
revealed before us, in place of all else, a yellow curtain of fog.
Below this, at our feet, yet apparently a long way from us, was a
strange, pale line of shimmering light, which they told me was the
water. At first I could hardly believe this. But, pausing a moment
while my companions whispered together, dull creakings and groanings
and uncouth shouts and cries, and at last the regular beat of oars,
came to my ears out of the bank of vapor, and convinced me that we
really had the river before us.

Mistress Bertram turned to me abruptly. "Listen," she said, "and
decide for yourself, my friend. We are close to the wharf now, and in
a few minutes shall know our fate. It is possible that we may be
intercepted at this point, and if that happen, it will be bad for me
and worse for any one aiding me. You have done us gallant service, but
you are young; and I am loath to drag you into perils which do not
belong to you. Take my advice, then, and leave us now. I would I could
reward you," she added hastily, "but that knave has my purse."

I put the child gently back into her arms. "Good-by," she said, with
more feeling. "We thank you. Some day I may return to England, and
have ample power----"

"Not so fast," I answered stiffly. "Did you think it possible,
mistress, that I would desert you now? I gave you back the child only
because it might hamper me, and will be safer with you. Come, let us
on at once to the wharf."

"You mean it?" she said.

"Of a certainty!" I answered, settling my cap on my head with perhaps
a boyish touch of the braggart.

At any rate, she did not take me at once at my word; and her thought
for me touched me the more because I judged her--I know not exactly
why--to be a woman not over prone to think of others. "Do not be
reckless," she said slowly, her eyes intently fixed on mine. "I should
be sorry to bring evil upon you. You are but a boy."

"And yet," I answered, smiling, "there is as good as a price upon my
head already. I should be reckless if I stayed here. If you will take
me with you, let us go. We have loitered too long already."

She turned then, asking no questions; but she looked at me from time
to time in a puzzled way, as though she thought she ought to know
me--as though I reminded her of some one. Paying little heed to this
then, I hurried her and her companion down to the water, traversing a
stretch of foreshore strewn with piles of wood and stacks of barrels
and old rotting boats, between which the mud lay deep. Fortunately it
was high tide, and so we had not far to go. In a minute or two I
distinguished the hull of a ship looming large through the fog; and a
few more steps placed us safely on a floating raft, on the far side of
which the vessel lay moored.

There was only one man to be seen lounging on the raft, and the
neighborhood was quiet. My spirits rose as I looked round. "Is this
the _Whelp?_" the tall lady asked. I had not heard the other open her
mouth since the encounter in the court.

"Yes, it is the _Whelp_, madam," the man answered, saluting her and
speaking formally, and with a foreign accent. "You are the lady who is
expected?"

"I am," she answered, with authority. "Will you tell the captain that
I desire to sail immediately, without a moment's delay? Do you
understand?"

"Well, the tide is going out," quoth the sailor, dubiously, looking
steadily into the fog, which hid the river. "It has just turned, it is
true. But as to sailing----"

She cut him short. "Go, go! man. Tell your captain what I say. And let
down a ladder for us to get on board."

He caught a rope which hung over the side, and, swinging himself up,
disappeared. We stood below, listening to the weird sounds which came
off the water, the creaking and flapping of masts and canvas, the whir
of wings and shrieks of unseen gulls, the distant hail of boatmen. A
bell in the city solemnly tolled eight. The younger woman shivered.
The elder's foot tapped impatiently on the planks. Shut in by the
yellow walls of fog, I experienced a strange sense of solitude; it was
as if we three were alone in the world--we three who had come together
so strangely.




                             CHAPTER VI.

                           MASTER CLARENCE.


We had stood thus for a few moments when a harsh voice, hailing us
from above, put an end to our several thoughts and forebodings. We
looked up and I saw half a dozen night-capped heads thrust over the
bulwarks. A rope ladder came hurtling down at our feet, and a man,
nimbly descending, held it tight at the bottom. "Now, madame!" he said
briskly. They all, I noticed, had the same foreign accent, yet all
spoke English; a singularity I did not understand, until I learned
later that the boat was the _Lions Whelp_, trading between London and
Calais, and manned from the latter place.

Mistress Bertram ascended quickly and steadily, holding the baby in
her arms. The other made some demur, lingering at the foot of the
ladder and looking up as if afraid, until her companion chid her
sharply. Then she too went up, but as she passed me--I was holding one
side of the ladder steady--she shot at me from under her hood a look
which disturbed me strangely.

It was the first time I had seen her face, and it was such a face as a
man rarely forgets. Not because of its beauty; rather because it was a
speaking face, a strange and expressive one, which the dark waving
hair, swelling in thick clusters upon either temple, seemed to
accentuate. The features were regular, but, the full red lips
excepted, rather thin than shapely. The nose, too, was prominent. But
the eyes! The eyes seemed to glorify the dark brilliant thinness of
the face, and to print it upon the memory. They were dark flashing
eyes, and their smile seemed to me perpetually to challenge, to allure
and repulse, and even to goad. Sometimes they were gay, more rarely
sad, sometimes soft, and again hard as steel. They changed in a moment
as one or another approached her. But always at their gayest, there
was a suspicion of weariness and fatigue in their depths. Or so I
thought later.

Something of this flashed through my mind as I followed her up the
side. But once on board I glanced round, forgetting her in the novelty
of my position. The _Whelp_ was decked fore and aft only, the
blackness of the hold gaping amidships, spanned by a narrow gangway,
which served to connect the two decks. We found ourselves in the
forepart, amid coils of rope and windlasses and water-casks;
surrounded by half a dozen wild-looking sailors wearing blue knitted
frocks and carrying sheath-knives at their girdles.

The foremost and biggest of these seemed to be the captain, although,
so far as outward appearances went, the only difference between him
and his crew lay in a marlin-spike which he wore slung to a thong
beside his knife. When I reached the deck he was telling a long story
to Mistress Bertram, and telling it very slowly. But the drift of it I
soon gathered. While the fog lasted he could not put to sea.

"Nonsense!" cried my masterful companion, chafing at his slowness of
speech. "Why not? Would it be dangerous?"

"Well, madam, it would be dangerous," he answered, more slowly than
ever. "Yes, it would be dangerous. And to put to sea in a fog? That is
not seamanship. And your baggage has not arrived."

"Never mind my baggage!" she answered imperiously. "I have made other
arrangements for it. Two or three things I know came on board last
night. I want to start--to start at once, do you hear?"

The captain shook his head, and said sluggishly that it was
impossible. Spitting on the deck he ground his heel leisurely round in
a knothole. "Impossible," he repeated; "it would not be seamanship to
start in a fog. When the fog lifts we will go. 'Twill be all the same
to-morrow. We shall lie at Leigh to-night, whether we go now or go
when the fog lifts."

"At Leigh?"

"That is it, madam."

"And when will you go from Leigh?" she cried indignantly.

"Daybreak to-morrow," he answered. "You leave it to me, mistress," he
continued, in a tone of rough patronage, "and you will see your good
man before you expect it."

"But, man!" she exclaimed, trembling with impotent rage. "Did not
Master Bertram engage you to bring me across whenever I might be
ready? Ay, and pay you handsomely for it? Did he not, sirrah?"

"To be sure, to be sure!" replied the giant unmoved. "Using
seamanship, and not going to sea in a fog, if it please you."

"It does not please me!" she retorted. "And why stay at Leigh?"

He looked up at the rigging, then down at the deck. He set his heel in
the knothole, and ground it round again. Then he looked at his
questioner with a broad smile. "Well, mistress, for a very good
reason. It is there your good man is waiting for you. Only," added
this careful keeper of a secret, "he bade me not tell any one."

She uttered a low cry, which might have been an echo of her baby's
cooing, and convulsively clasped the child more tightly to her. "He is
at Leigh!" she murmured, flushing and trembling, another woman
altogether. Even her voice was wonderfully changed. "He is really at
Leigh, you say?"

"To be sure!" replied the captain, with a portentous wink and a
mysterious roll of the head. "He is there safe enough! Safe enough,
you may bet your handsome face to a rushlight. And we will be there
to-night."

She started up with a wild gesture. For a moment she had sat down on a
cask standing beside her, and forgotten our peril, and the probability
that we might never see Leigh at all. Now, I have said, she started
up. "No, no!" she cried, struggling for breath and utterance. "Oh, no!
no! Let us go at once. We must start at once!" Her voice was
hysterical in its sudden anxiety and terror, as the consciousness of
our position rolled back upon her. "Captain! listen, listen!" she
pleaded. "Let us start now, and my husband will give you double. I
will promise you double whatever he said if you will chance the fog."

I think all who heard her were moved, save the captain only. He rubbed
his head and grinned. Slow and heavy, he saw nothing in her prayer
save the freak of a woman wild to get to her man. He did not weigh her
promise at a groat; she was but a woman. And being a foreigner, he did
not perceive a certain air of breeding which might have influenced a
native. He was one of those men against whose stupidity Father Carey
used to say the gods fight in vain. When he answered good-naturedly,
"No, no, mistress, it is impossible. It would not be seamanship," I
felt that we might as well try to stop the ebbing tide as move him
from his position.

The feeling was a maddening one. The special peril which menaced my
companions I did not know; but I knew they feared pursuit, and I had
every reason to fear it for myself. Yet at any moment, out of the
fog which encircled us so closely that we could barely see the raft
below--and the shore not at all--might come the tramp of hurrying feet
and the stern hail of the law. It was maddening to think of this, and
to know that we had only to cast off a rope or two in order to escape;
and to know also that we were absolutely helpless.

I expected that Mistress Bertram, brave as she had shown herself,
would burst into a passion of rage or tears. But apparently she had
one hope left. She looked at me.

I tried to think--to think hard. Alas, I seemed only able to listen.
An hour had gone by since we parted from that rascal in the court, and
we might expect him to appear at any moment, vengeful and exultant,
with a posse at his back. Yet I tried hard to think; and the fog
presently suggested a possible course. "Look here," I said suddenly,
speaking for the first time, "if you do not start until the fog lifts,
captain, we may as well breakfast ashore, and return presently."

"That is as you please," he answered indifferently.

"What do you think?" I said, turning to my companions with as much
carelessness as I could command. "Had we not better do that?"

Mistress Bertram did not understand, but in her despair she obeyed the
motion of my hand mechanically, and walked to the side. The younger
woman followed more slowly, so that I had to speak to her with some
curtness, bidding her make haste; for I was in a fever until we were
clear of the _Whelp_ and the Lion Wharf. It had struck me that, if the
ship were not to leave at once, we were nowhere in so much danger as
on board. At large in the fog we might escape detection for a time.
Our pursuers might as well look for a needle in a haystack as seek us
through it when once we were clear of the wharf. And this was not the
end of my idea. But for the present it was enough. Therefore I took up
Mistress Anne very short. "Come!" I said, "be quick! Let me help you."

She obeyed, and I was ashamed of my impatience when at the foot of the
ladder she thanked me prettily. It was almost with good cheer in my
voice and a rebound of spirits that I explained, as I hurried my
companions across the raft, what my plan was.

The moment we were ashore I felt safer. The fog swallowed us up quick,
as the Bible says. The very hull of the ship vanished from sight
before we had gone half a dozen paces. I had never seen a London fog
before, and to me it seemed portentous and providential; a marvel as
great as the crimson hail which fell in the London gardens to mark her
Majesty's accession.

Yet after all, without my happy thought, the fog would have availed us
little. We had scarcely gone a score of yards before the cautious
tread of several people hastening down the strand toward the wharf
struck my ear. They were proceeding in silence, and we might not have
noticed their approach if the foremost had not by chance tripped and
fallen; whereupon one laughed and another swore. With a warning hand I
grasped my companions' arms, and hurried them forward some paces until
I felt sure that our figures could not be seen through the mist. Then
I halted, and we stood listening, gazing into one another's strained
eyes, while the steps came nearer and nearer, crossed our track and
then with a noisy rush thundered on the wooden raft. My ear caught the
jingle of harness and the clank of weapons.

"It is the watch," I muttered. "Come, and make no noise. What I want
is a little this way. I fancy I saw it as we passed down to the
wharf."

They turned with me, but we had not taken many steps before Mistress
Anne, who was walking on my left side, stumbled over something. She
tried to save herself, but failed and fell heavily, uttering as she
did so a loud cry. I sprang to her assistance, and even before I
raised her I laid my hand lightly on her mouth. "Hush!" I said softly,
"for safety's sake, make no noise. What is the matter?"

"Oh!" she moaned, making no effort to rise, "my ankle! my ankle! I am
sure I have broken it."

I muttered my dismay, while Mistress Bertram, stooping anxiously,
examined the injured limb. "Can you stand?" she asked.

But it was no time for questioning, and I put her aside. The troop
which had passed were within easy hearing, and if there should be one
among them familiar with the girl's voice, we might be pounced upon,
fog or no fog. I felt that it was no time for ceremony, and picked
Mistress Anne up in my arms, whispering to the elder woman: "Go on
ahead! I think I see the boat. It is straight before you."

Luckily I was right, it was the boat; and so far well. But at the
moment I spoke I heard a sudden outcry behind us, and knew the hunt
was up. I plunged forward with my burden, recklessly and blindly,
through mud and over obstacles. The wherry for which I was making was
moored in the water a few feet from the edge. I had remarked it idly
and without purpose as we came down to the wharf, and had even noticed
that the oars were lying in it. Now, if we could reach it and start
down the river for Leigh, we might by possibility gain that place, and
meet Mistress Bertram's husband.

At any late, nothing in the world seemed so desirable to me at the
moment as the shelter of that boat. I plunged through the mud, and
waded desperately through the water to it, Mistress Bertram scarce a
whit behind me. I reached it, but reached it only as the foremost
pursuer caught sight of us. I heard his shout of triumph, and somehow
I bundled my burden into the boat--I remember that she clung about my
neck in fear, and I had to loosen her hands roughly. But I did loosen
them--in time. With one stroke of my hunting-knife, I severed the
rope, and pushing off the boat with all my strength, sprang into it as
it floated away--and was in time. But one second's delay would have
undone us. Two men were already in the water up to their knees, and
their very breath was hot on my face as we swung out into the stream.

Fortunately, I had had experience of boats on the Avon, at Bidford and
Stratford, and could pull a good oar. For a moment indeed the wherry
rolled and dipped as I snatched up the sculls; but I quickly got her
in hand, and, bending to my work, sent her spinning through the mist,
every stroke I pulled increasing the distance between us and our now
unseen foes. Happily we were below London Bridge, and had not that
dangerous passage to make. The river, too, was nearly clear of craft,
and though once and again in the Pool a huge hulk loomed suddenly
across our bows, and then faded behind us into the mist like some
monstrous phantom, and so told of a danger narrowly escaped, I thought
it best to run all risks, and go ahead as long as the tide should ebb.

It was strange how suddenly we had passed from storm into calm.
Mistress Anne had bound her ankle with a handkerchief, and bravely
made light of the hurt; and now the two women sat crouching in the
stern watching me, their heads together, their faces pale. The mist
had closed round us, and we were alone again, gliding over the bosom
of the great river that runs down to the sea. I was oddly struck by
the strange current of life which for a week had tossed me from one
adventure to another, only to bring me into contact at length with
these two, and sweep me into the unknown whirlpool of their fortunes.

Who were they? A merchant's wife and her sister flying from Bishop
Bonner's inquisition? I thought it likely. Their cloaks and hoods
indeed, and all that I could see of their clothes, fell below such a
condition; but probably they were worn as a disguise. Their speech
rose as much above it, but I knew that of late many merchant's wives
had become scholars, and might pass in noblemen's houses; even as in
those days when London waxed fat, and set up and threw down
governments, every alderman had come to ride in mail.

No doubt the women, watching me in anxious silence, were as curious
about me. I still bore the stains of country travel. I was unwashen,
unkempt, my doublet was torn, the cloak I had cast at my feet was the
very wreck of a cloak. Yet I read no distrust in their looks. The
elder's brave eyes seemed ever thanking me. I never saw her lips move
silently that they did not shape "Well done!" And though I caught
Mistress Anne scanning me once or twice with an expression I could ill
interpret, a smile took its place the moment her gaze met mine.

We had passed, but were still in sight of, Greenwich Palace--as they
told me--when the mist rose suddenly like a curtain rolled away, and
the cold, bright February sun, shining out, disclosed the sparkling
river with the green hills rising on our right hand. Here and there on
its surface a small boat such as our own moved to and fro, and in the
distant Pool from which we had come rose a little forest of masts. I
hung on the oars a moment, and my eyes were drawn to a two-masted
vessel which, nearly half a mile below us, was drifting down, gently
heeling over with the current as the crew got up the sails. "I wonder
whither she is bound," I said thoughtfully, "and whether they would
take us on board by any chance."

Mistress Bertram shook her head. "I have no money," she answered
sadly. "I fear we must go on to Leigh, if it be any way possible. You
are tired, and no wonder. But what is it?" with a sudden change of
voice. "What is the matter?"

I had flashed out the oars with a single touch, and begun to pull as
fast as I could down the stream. No doubt my face, too, proclaimed my
discovery and awoke her fears. "Look behind!" I muttered between my
set teeth.

She turned, and on the instant uttered a low cry. A wherry like our
own, but even lighter--in my first glance up the river I had not
noticed it--had stolen nearer to us, and yet nearer, and now throwing
aside disguise was in hot pursuit of us. There were three men on
board, two rowing and one steering. When they saw that we had
discovered them they hailed us in a loud voice, and I heard the
steersman's feet rattle on the boards, as he cried to his men to give
way, and stamped in very eagerness. My only reply was to take a longer
stroke, and, pulling hard, to sweep away from them.

But presently my first strength died away, and the work began to tell
upon me, and little by little they overhauled us. Not that I gave up
at once for that. They were still some sixty yards behind, and for a
few minutes at any rate I might put off capture. In that time
something might happen. At the worst they were only three to one, and
their boat looked light and cranky and easy to upset.

So I pulled on, savagely straining at the oars. But my chest heaved
and my arms ached more and more with each stroke. The banks slid by
us; we turned one bend, then another, though I saw nothing of them. I
saw only the pursuing boat, on which my eyes were fixed, heard only
the measured rattle of the oars in the rowlocks. A minute, two
minutes, three minutes passed. They had not gained on us, but the
water was beginning to waver before my eyes, their boat seemed
floating in the air, there was a pulsation in my ears louder than that
of the oars, I struggled and yet I flagged. My knees trembled. Their
boat shot nearer now, nearer and nearer, so that I could read the
smile of triumph on the steersman's dark face and hear his cry of
exultation. Nearer! and then with a cry I dropped the oars.

"Quick!" I panted to my companions. "Change places with me! So!"
Trembling and out of breath as I was, I crawled between the women and
gained the stern sheets of the boat. As I passed Mistress Bertram she
clutched my arm. Her eyes, as they met mine, flashed fire, her lips
were white. "The man steering!" she hissed between her teeth. "Leave
the others. He is Clarence, and I fear him!"

I nodded; but still, as the hostile boat bore swiftly down upon us, I
cast a glance round to see if there were any help at hand. I saw no
sign of any. I saw only the pale blue sky overhead, and the stream
flowing swiftly under the boat. I drew my sword. The case was one
rather for despair than courage. The women were in my charge, and if I
did not acquit myself like a man now, when should I do so? Bah! it
would soon be over.

There was an instant's confusion in the other boat, as the crew ceased
rowing, and, seeing my attitude and not liking it, changed their
seats. To my joy the man, who had hitherto been steering, flung a
curse at the others and came forward to bear the brunt of the
encounter. He was a tall, sinewy man, past middle age, with a
clean-shaven face, a dark complexion, and cruel eyes. So he was Master
Clarence! Well, he had the air of a swordsman and a soldier. I
trembled for the women.

"Surrender, you fool!" he cried to me harshly. "In the Queen's
name--do you hear? What do you in this company?"

I answered nothing, for I was out of breath. But softly, my eyes on
his, I drew out with my left hand my hunting-knife. If I could beat
aside his sword, I would spring upon him and drive the knife home with
that hand. So, standing erect in bow and stern we faced one another,
the man and the boy, the flush of rage and exertion on my cheek, a
dark shade on his. And silently the boats drew together.

Thought is quick, quicker than anything else in the world I suppose,
for in some drawn-out second before the boats came together I had time
to wonder where I had seen his face before, and to rack my memory. I
knew no Master Clarence, yet I had seen this man somewhere. Another
second, and away with thought! He was crouching for a spring. I drew
back a little, then lunged--lunged with heart and hand. Our swords
crossed and whistled--just crossed--and even as I saw his eyes gleam
behind his point, the shock of the two boats coming together flung us
both backward and apart. A moment we reeled, staggering and throwing
out wild hands. I strove hard to recover myself, nay, I almost did so;
then I caught my foot in Mistress Anne's cloak, which she had left in
her place, and fell heavily back into the boat.

I was up in a moment--on my knees at least--and unhurt. But another
was before me. As I stooped half-risen, I saw one moment a dark shadow
above me, and the next a sheet of flame shone before my eyes, and a
tremendous shock swept all away. I fell senseless into the bottom of
the boat, knowing nothing of what had happened to me.




                             CHAPTER VII.

                     ON BOARD THE "FRAMLINGHAM."


I am told by people who have been seasick that the sound of the waves
beating against the hull comes in time to be an intolerable torment.
But bad as this may be, it can be nothing in comparison with the pains
I suffered from the same cause, as I recovered my senses. My brain
seemed to be a cavern into which each moment, with a rhythmical
regularity which added the pangs of anticipation to those of reality,
the sea rushed, booming and thundering, jarring every nerve and
straining the walls to bursting, and making each moment of
consciousness a vivid agony. And this lasted long; how long I cannot
say. But it had subsided somewhat when I first opened my eyes, and
dully, not daring to move my head, looked up.

I was lying on my back. About a foot from my eyes were rough beams of
wood disclosed by a smoky yellow light, which flickered on the
knotholes and rude joists. The light swayed to and fro regularly; and
this adding to my pain, I closed my eyes with a moan. Then some one
came to me, and I heard voices which sounded a long way off, and
promptly fell again into a deep sleep, troubled still, but less
painfully, by the same rhythmical shocks, the same dull crashings in
my brain.

When I awoke again I had sense to know what caused this, and where I
was--in a berth on board ship. The noise which had so troubled me was
that of the waves beating against her forefoot. The beams so close to
my face formed the deck, the smoky light came from the ship's lantern
swinging on a hook. I tried to turn. Some one came again, and with
gentle hands arranged my pillow and presently began to feed me with a
spoon. When I had swallowed a few mouthfuls I gained strength to turn.

Who was this feeding me? The light was at her back and dazzled me.
For a short while I took her for Petronilla, my thoughts going back at
one bound to Coton, and skipping all that had happened since I left
home. But as I grew stronger I grew clearer, and recalling bit by bit
what had happened in the boat, I recognized Mistress Anne. I tried to
murmur thanks, but she laid a cool finger on my lips and shook her
head, smiling on me. "You must not talk," she murmured, "you are
getting well. Now go to sleep again."

I shut my eyes at once as a child might. Another interval of
unconsciousness, painless this time, followed, and again I awoke. I
was lying on my side now, and without moving could see the whole of
the tiny cabin. The lantern still hung and smoked. But the light was
steady now, and I heard no splashing without, nor the dull groaning
and creaking of the timbers within. There reigned a quiet which seemed
bliss to me; and I lay wrapped in it, my thoughts growing clearer and
clearer each moment.

On a sea-chest at the farther end of the cabin were sitting two people
engaged in talk. The one, a woman, I recognized immediately. The gray
eyes full of command, the handsome features, the reddish-brown hair
and gracious figure left me in no doubt, even for a moment, that I
looked on Mistress Bertram. The sharer of her seat was a tall, thin
man with a thoughtful face and dreamy, rather melancholy eyes. One of
her hands rested on his knee, and her lips as she talked were close to
his ear. A little aside, sitting on the lowest step of the ladder
which led to the deck, her head leaning against the timbers, and a
cloak about her, was Mistress Anne.

I tried to speak, and after more than one effort found my voice.
"Where am I?" I whispered. My head ached sadly, and I fancied, though
I was too languid to raise my hand to it, that it was bandaged. My
mind was so far clear that I remembered Master Clarence and his
pursuit and the fight in the boats, and knew that we ought to be on
our way to prison. Who, then, was the mild, comely gentleman whose
length of limb made the cabin seem smaller than it was? Not a jailer,
surely? Yet who else?

I could compass no more than a whisper, but faint as my voice was they
all heard me, and looked up. "Anne!" the elder lady cried sharply,
seeming by her tone to direct the other to attend to me. Yet was she
herself the first to rise, and come and lay her hand on my brow. "Ah!
the fever is gone!" she said, speaking apparently to the gentleman,
who kept his seat. "His head is quite cool. He will do well now, I am
sure. Do you know me?" she continued, leaning over me.

I looked up into her eyes, and read only kindness. "Yes," I muttered.
But the effort of looking was so painful that I closed my eyes again
with a sigh. Nevertheless, my memory of the events which had gone
before my illness grew clearer, and I fumbled feebly for something
which should have been at my side. "Where is--where is my sword?" I
made shift to whisper.

She laughed. "Show it to him, Anne," she said; "what a never-die it
is! There, Master Knight Errant, we did not forget to bring it off the
field, you see!"

"But how," I murmured, "how did you escape?" I saw that there was no
question of a prison. Her laugh was gay, her voice full of content.

"That is a long story," she answered kindly. "Are you well enough to
hear it? You think you are? Then take some of this first. You remember
that knave Philip striking you on the head with an oar as you got up?
No? Well, it was a cowardly stroke, but it stood him in little stead,
for we had drifted, in the excitement of the race, under the stern of
the ship which you remember seeing a little before. There were English
seamen on her; and when they saw three men in the act of boarding two
defenseless women, they stepped in, and threatened to send Clarence
and his crew to the bottom unless they sheered off."

"Ha!" I murmured. "Good!"

"And so we escaped. I prayed the captain to take us on board his ship,
the _Framlingham_, and he did so. More, putting into Leigh on his way
to the Nore, he took off my husband. There he stands, and when you are
better he shall thank you."

"Nay, he will thank you now," said the tall man, rising and stepping
to my berth with his head bent. He could not stand upright, so low was
the deck. "But for you," he continued, his earnestness showing in his
voice and eyes--the latter were almost too tender for a man's--"my
wife would be now lying in prison, her life in jeopardy, and her
property as good as gone. She has told me how bravely you rescued her
from that cur in Cheapside, and how your presence of mind baffled the
watch at the riverside. It is well, young gentleman. It is very well.
But these things call for other returns than words. When it lies in
her power my wife will make them; if not to-day, to-morrow, and if not
to-morrow, the day after."

I was very weak, and his words brought the tears to my eyes. "She has
saved my life already," I murmured.

"You foolish boy!" she cried, smiling down on me, her hand on her
husband's shoulder. "You got your head broken in my defense. It was a
great thing, was it not, that I did not leave you to die in the boat?
There, make haste and get well. You have talked enough now. Go to
sleep, or we shall have the fever back again."

"One thing first," I pleaded. "Tell me whither we are going."

"In a few hours we shall be at Dort in Holland," she answered. "But be
content. We will take care of you, and send you back if you will, or
you shall still come with us; as you please. Be content. Go to sleep
now and get strong. Presently, perhaps, we shall have need of your
help again."

They went and sat down then on their former seat and talked in
whispers, while Mistress Anne shook up my pillows, and laid a fresh
cool bandage on my head. I was too weak to speak my gratitude, but I
tried to look it and so fell asleep again, her hand in mine, and the
wondrous smile of those lustrous eyes the last impression of which I
was conscious.


A long dreamless sleep followed. When I awoke once more the light
still hung steady, but the peacefulness of night was gone. We lay in
the midst of turmoil. The scampering of feet over the deck above me,
the creaking of the windlass, the bumping and clattering of barrels
hoisted in or hoisted out, the harsh sound of voices raised in a
foreign tongue and in queer keys, sufficed as I grew wide-awake to
tell me we were in port.

But the cabin was empty, and I lay for some time gazing at its dreary
interior, and wondering what was to become of me. Presently an uneasy
fear crept into my mind. What if my companions had deserted me? Alone,
ill, and penniless in a foreign land, what should I do? This fear in
my sick state was so terrible that I struggled to get up, and with
reeling brain and nerveless hands did get out of my berth. But this
feat accomplished I found that I could not stand. Everything swam
before my eyes. I could not take a single step, but remained, clinging
helplessly to the edge of my berth, despair at my heart. I tried to
call out, but my voice rose little above a whisper, and the banging
and shrieking, the babel without went on endlessly. Oh, it was cruel!
cruel! They had left me!

I think my senses were leaving me too, when I felt an arm about my
waist, and found Mistress Anne by my side guiding me to the chest. I
sat down on it, the certainty of my helplessness and the sudden relief
of her presence bringing the tears to my eyes. She fanned me, and gave
me some restorative, chiding me the while for getting out of my berth.

"I thought that you had gone and left me," I muttered. I was as weak
as a child.

She said cheerily: "Did you leave us when we were in trouble? Of
course you did not. There, take some more of this. After all, it is
well you are up, for in a short time we must move you to the other
boat."

"The other boat?"

"Yes, we are at Dort, you know. And we are going by the Waal, a branch
of the Rhine, to Arnheim. But the boat is here, close to this one,
and, with help, I think you will be able to walk to it."

"I am sure I shall if you will give me your arm," I answered
gratefully.

"But you will not think again," she replied, "that we have deserted
you?"

"No," I said. "I will trust you always."

I wondered why a shadow crossed her face at that. But I had no time to
do more than wonder, for Master Bertram, coming down, brought our
sitting to an end. She bustled about to wrap me up, and somehow,
partly walking, partly carried, I was got on deck. There I sat down on
a bale to recover myself, and felt at once much the better for the
fresh, keen air, the clear sky and wintry sunshine which welcomed me
to a foreign land.

On the outer side of the vessel stretched a wide expanse of turbid
water, five or six times as wide as the Thames at London, and
foam-flecked here and there by the up-running tide. On the other side
was a wide and spacious quay, paved neatly with round stones, and
piled here and there with merchandise; but possessing, by virtue of
the lines of leafless elms which bordered it, a quaint air of
rusticity in the midst of bustle. The sober bearing of the sturdy
landsmen, going quietly about their business, accorded well with the
substantial comfort of the rows of tall, steep-roofed houses I saw
beyond the quay, and seemed only made more homely by the occasional
swagger and uncouth cry of some half-barbarous seaman, wandering
aimlessly about. Above the town rose the heavy square tower of a
church, a notable landmark where all around, land and water, lay so
low, where the horizon seemed so far, and the sky so wide and breezy.

"So you have made up your mind to come with us," said Master Bertram,
returning to my side--he had left me to make some arrangements. "You
understand that if you would prefer to go home I can secure your
tendance here by good, kindly people, and provide for your passage
back when you feel strong enough to cross. You understand that? And
that the choice is entirely your own? So which will you do?"

I changed color and felt I did. I shrunk, as being well and strong I
should not have shrunk, from losing sight of those three faces which I
had known for so short a time, yet which alone stood between myself
and loneliness. "I would rather come with you," I stammered. "But I
shall be a great burden to you now, I fear."

"It is not that," he replied, with hearty assurance in his voice. "A
week's rest and quiet will restore you to strength, and then the
burden will be on the other shoulder. It is for your own sake I give
you the choice, because our future is for the time uncertain. Very
uncertain," he repeated, his brow clouding over; "and to become our
companion may expose you to fresh dangers. We are refugees from
England; that you probably guess. Our plan was to go to France, where
are many of our friends, and where we could live safely until better
times. You know how that plan was frustrated. Here the Spaniards are
masters--Prince Philip's people; and if we are recognized, we shall be
arrested and sent back to England. Still, my wife and I must make the
best of it. The hue and cry will not follow us for some days, and
there is still a degree of independence in the cities of Holland which
may, since I have friends here, protect us for a time. Now you know
something of our position, my friend. You can make your choice with
your eyes open. Either way we shall not forget you."

"I will go on with you, if you please," I answered at once. "I, too,
cannot go home." And as I said this, Mistress Bertram also came up,
and I took her hand in mine--which looked, by the way, so strangely
thin I scarcely recognized it--and kissed it. "I will come with you,
madam, if you will let me," I said.

"Good!" she replied, her eyes sparkling. "I said you would! I do not
mind telling you now that I am glad of it. And if ever we return to
England, as God grant we may and soon, you shall not regret your
decision. Shall he, Richard?"

"If you say he shall not, my dear," he responded, smiling at her
enthusiasm, "I think I may answer for it he will not."

I was struck then, as I had been before, by a certain air of deference
which the husband assumed toward the wife. It did not surprise me, for
her bearing and manner, as well as such of her actions as I had seen,
stamped her as singularly self-reliant and independent for a woman;
and to these qualities, as much as to the rather dreamy character of
the husband, I was content to set down the peculiarity. I should add
that a rare and pretty tenderness constantly displayed on her part
toward him robbed it of any semblance of unseemliness.

They saw that the exertion of talking exhausted me, and so, with an
encouraging nod, left me to myself. A few minutes later a couple of
English sailors, belonging to the _Framlingham_, came up, and with
gentle strength transported me, under Mistress Anne's directions, to a
queer-looking wide-beamed boat which lay almost alongside. She was
more like a huge Thames barge than anything else, for she drew little
water, but had a great expanse of sail when all was set. There was a
large deck-house, gay with paint and as clean as it could be; and in a
compartment at one end of this--which seemed to be assigned to our
party--I was soon comfortably settled.

Exhausted as I was by the excitement of sitting up and being moved, I
knew little of what passed about me for the next two days, and
remember less. I slept and ate, and sometimes awoke to wonder where I
was. But the meals and the vague attempts at thought made scarcely
more impression on my mind than the sleep. Yet all the while I was
gaining strength rapidly, my youth and health standing me in good
stead. The wound in my head, which had caused great loss of blood,
healed all one way, as we say in Warwickshire; and about noon, on the
second day after leaving Dort, I was well enough to reach the deck
unassisted, and sit in the sunshine on a pile of rugs which Mistress
Anne, my constant nurse, had laid for me in a corner sheltered from
the wind.

                          *   *   *   *   *

Fortunately the weather was mild and warm, and the sunshine fell
brightly on the wide river and the wider plain of pasture which
stretched away on either side of the horizon, dotted, here and there
only, by a windmill, a farmhouse, the steeple of a church, the brown
sails of a barge, or at most broken by a low dike or a line of
sand-dunes. All was open, free; all was largeness, space, and
distance. I gazed astonished.

The husband and wife, who were pacing the deck forward, came to me. He
noticed the wondering looks I cast round. "This is new to you?" he
said smiling.

"Quite--quite new," I answered. "I never imagined anything so flat,
and yet in its way so beautiful."

"You do not know Lincolnshire?"

"No."

"Ah, that is my native county," he answered. "It is much like this.
But you are better, and you can talk again. Now I and my wife have
been discussing whether we shall tell you more about ourselves. And
since there is no time like the present I may say that we have decided
to trust you."

"All in all or not at all," Mistress Bertram added brightly.

I murmured my thanks.

"Then, first to tell you who we are. For myself I am plain Richard
Bertie of Lincolnshire, at your service. My wife is something more
than appears from this, or"--with a smile--"from her present not too
graceful dress. She is----"

"Stop, Richard! This is not sufficiently formal," my lady cried
prettily. "I have the honor to present to you, young gentleman," she
went on, laughing merrily and making a very grand courtesy before me,
"Katherine, Duchess of Suffolk."

I made shift to get to my feet, and bowed respectfully, but she forced
me to sit down again. "Enough of that," she said lightly, "until we go
back to England. Here and for the future we are Master Bertram and his
wife. And this young lady, my distant kinswoman, Anne Brandon, must
pass as Mistress Anne. You wonder how we came to be straying in the
streets alone and unattended when you found us?"

I did wonder, for the name of the gay and brilliant Duchess of
Suffolk was well known even to me, a country lad. Her former husband,
Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk, had been not only the one trusted
and constant friend of King Henry the Eighth, but the king's
brother-in-law, his first wife having been Mary, Princess of England
and Queen Dowager of France. Late in his splendid and prosperous
career the Duke had married Katherine, the heiress of Lord Willoughby
de Eresby, and she it was who stood before me, still young and
handsome. After her husband's death she had made England ring with her
name, first by a love match with a Lincolnshire squire, and secondly
by her fearless and outspoken defense of the reformers. I did wonder
indeed how she had come to be wandering in the streets at daybreak, an
object of a chance passer's chivalry and pity.

"It is simple enough," she said dryly; "I am rich, I am a Protestant,
and I have an enemy. When I do not like a person I speak out. Do I
not, Richard?"

"You do indeed, my dear," he answered smiling.

"And once I spoke out to Bishop Gardiner. What! Do you know Stephen
Gardiner?"

For I had started at the name, after which I could scarcely have
concealed my knowledge if I would. So I answered simply, "Yes, I have
seen him." I was thinking how wonderful this was. These people had
been utter strangers to me until a day or two before, yet now we were
all looking out together from the deck of a Dutch boat on the low
Dutch landscape, united by one tie, the enmity of the same man.

"He is a man to be dreaded," the Duchess continued, her eyes resting
on her baby, which lay asleep on my bundle of rugs--and I guessed what
fear it was had tamed her pride to flight. "His power in England is
absolute. We learned that it was his purpose to arrest me, and
determined to leave England. But our very household was full of spies,
and though we chose a time when Clarence, our steward, whom we had
long suspected of being Gardiner's chief tool, was away, Philip, his
deputy, gained a clew to our design, and watched us. We gave him the
slip with difficulty, leaving our luggage, but he dogged and overtook
us, and the rest you know."

I bowed. As I gazed at her, my admiration, I know, shone in my eyes.
She looked, as she stood on the deck, an exile and fugitive, so gay,
so bright, so indomitable, that in herself she was at once a warranty
and an omen of better times. The breeze had heightened her color and
loosened here and there a tress of her auburn hair. No wonder Master
Bertie looked proudly on his Duchess.

Suddenly a thing I had clean forgotten flashed into my mind, and I
thrust my hand into my pocket. The action was so abrupt that it
attracted their attention, and when I pulled out a packet--two
packets--there were three pairs of eyes upon me. The seal dangled from
one missive. "What have you there?" the Duchess asked briskly, for she
was a woman, and curious. "Do you carry the deeds of your property
about with you?"

"No," I said, not unwilling to make a small sensation. "This touches
your Grace."

"Hush!" she cried, raising one imperious finger. "Transgressing
already? From this time forth I am Mistress Bertram, remember. But
come," she went on, eying the packet with the seal inquisitively, "how
does it touch me?"

I put it silently into her hands, and she opened it and read a few
lines, her husband peeping over her shoulder. As she read her brow
darkened, her eyes grew hard. Master Bertie's face changed with hers,
and they both peeped suddenly at me over the edge of the parchment,
suspicion and hostility in their glances. "How came you by this, young
sir?" he said slowly, after a long pause. "Have we escaped Peter to
fall into the hands of Paul?"

"No, no!" I cried hurriedly. I saw that I had made a greater sensation
than I had bargained for. I hastened to tell them how I had met with
Gardiner's servant at Stony Stratford, and how I had become possessed
of his credentials. They laughed of course--indeed they laughed so
loudly that the placid Dutchmen, standing aft with their hands in
their breeches-pockets, stared open-mouthed at us, and the kindred
cattle on the bank looked mildly up from the knee-deep grass.

"And what was the other packet?" the Duchess asked presently. "Is that
it in your hand?"

"Yes," I answered, holding it up with some reluctance. "It seems to be
a letter addressed to Mistress Clarence."

"Clarence!" she cried. "Clarence!" arresting the hand she was
extending. "What! Here is our friend again then. What is in it? You
have opened it?"

"No."

"You have not? Then quick, open it!" she exclaimed. "This too touches
us, I will bet a penny. Let us see at once what it contains. Clarence
indeed! Perhaps we may have him on the hip yet, the arch-traitor!"

But I held the pocket-book back, though my cheeks reddened and I knew
I must seem foolish. They made certain that this letter was a
communication to some spy, probably to Clarence himself under cover of
a feminine address. Perhaps it was, but it bore a woman's name and it
was sealed; and foolish though I might be, I would not betray the
woman's secret.

"No, madam," I said confused, awkward, stammering, yet withholding it
with a secret obstinacy; "pardon me if I do not obey you--if I do not
let this be opened. It may be what you say," I added with an effort;
"but it may also contain an honest secret, and that a woman's."

"What do you say?" cried the Duchess; "here are scruples!" At that her
husband smiled, and I looked in despair from him to Mistress Anne.
Would she sympathize with my feelings? I found that she had turned her
back on us, and was gazing over the side. "Do you really mean,"
continued the Duchess, tapping her foot sharply on the deck, "that you
are not going to open that, you foolish boy?"

"I do--with your Grace's leave," I answered.

"Or without my Grace's leave! That is what you mean," she retorted
pettishly, a red spot in each cheek. "When people will not do what I
ask, it is always, Grace! Grace! Grace! But I know them now."

I dared not smile; and I would not look up, lest my heart should fail
me and I should give her her way.

"You foolish boy!" she again said, and sniffed. Then with a toss of
her head she went away, her husband following her obediently.

I feared that she was grievously offended, and I got up restlessly and
went across the deck to the rail on which Mistress Anne was leaning,
meaning to say something which should gain for me her sympathy,
perhaps her advice. But the words died on my lips, for as I approached
she turned her face abruptly toward me, and it was so white, so
haggard, so drawn, that I uttered a cry of alarm. "You are ill!" I
exclaimed. "Let me call the Duchess!"

She gripped my sleeve almost fiercely, "Hush!" she muttered. "Do
nothing of the kind. I am not well. It is the water. But it will pass
off, if you do not notice it. I hate to be noticed," she added, with
an angry shrug.

I was full of pity for her and reproached myself sorely. "What a
selfish brute I have been!" I said. "You have watched by me night
after night, and nursed me day after day, and I have scarcely thanked
you. And now you are ill yourself. It is my fault!"

She looked at me, a wan smile on her face. "A little, perhaps," she
answered faintly. "But it is chiefly the water. I shall be better
presently. About that letter--did you not come to speak to me about
it?"

"Never mind it now," I said anxiously. "Will you not lie down on the
rugs awhile? Let me give you my place," I pleaded.

"No, no!" she cried impatiently; and seeing I vexed her by my
importunity, I desisted. "The letter," she went on; "you will open it
by and by?"

"No," I said slowly, considering, to tell the truth, the strength of
my resolution, "I think I shall not."

"You will! you will!" she repeated, with a kind of scorn. "The Duchess
will ask you again, and you will give it to her. Of course you will!"

Her tone was strangely querulous, and her eyes continually flashed
keen, biting glances at me. But I thought only that she was ill and
excited, and I fancied it was best to humor her. "Well, perhaps I
shall," I said soothingly. "Possibly. It is hard to refuse her
anything. And yet I hope I may not. The girl--it may be a girl's
secret."

"Well?" she asked, interrupting me abruptly, her voice harsh and
unmusical. "What of her?" She laid her hand on her bosom as though to
still some secret pain. I looked at her, anxious and wondering, but
she had again averted her face. "What of her?" she repeated.

"Only that--I would not willingly hurt her!" I blurted out.

She did not answer. She stood a moment, then to my surprise she turned
away without a word, and merely commanding me by a gesture of the hand
not to follow, walked slowly away. I watched her cross the deck and
pass through the doorway into the deck-house. She did not once turn
her face, and my only fear was that she was ill; more seriously ill,
perhaps, than she had acknowledged.




                            CHAPTER VIII.

                          A HOUSE OF PEACE.


As the day went on, therefore, I looked eagerly for Mistress Anne's
return, but she appeared no more, though I maintained a close watch
on the cabin-door. All the afternoon, too, the Duchess kept away from
me, and I feared that I had seriously offended her; so that it was
with no very pleasant anticipations that, going into that part of the
deck-house which served us for a common room, to see if the evening
meal was set, I found only the Duchess and Master Bertie prepared to
sit down to it. I suppose that something of my feeling was expressed
in my face, for while I was yet half-way between door and table, my
lady gave way to a peal of merriment.

"Come, sit down, and do not be afraid!" she cried pleasantly, her gray
eyes still full of laughter. "I vow the lad thinks I shall eat him.
Nay, when all is said and done, I like you the better, Sir Knight
Errant, for your scruples. I see that you are determined to act up to
your name. But that reminds me," she added in a more serious vein. "We
have been frank with you. You must be equally frank with us. What are
we to call you, pray?"

I looked down at my plate and felt my face grow scarlet. The wound
which the discovery of my father's treachery had dealt me had begun to
heal. In the action, the movement, the adventure of the last
fortnight, I had well-nigh lost sight of the blot on my escutcheon, of
the shame which had driven me from home. But the question, "What are
we to call you?" revived the smart, and revived it with an added pang.
It had been very well, in theory, to proudly discard my old name. It
was painful, in practice, to be unable to answer the Duchess, "I am a
Cludde of Coton, nephew to Sir Anthony, formerly esquire of the body
to King Henry. I am no unworthy follower and associate even for you,"
and to have instead to reply, "I have no name. I am nobody. I have all
to make and win." Yet this was my ill-fortune.

Her woman's eye saw my trouble as I hesitated, confused and doubting
what I should reply. "Come!" she said good-naturedly, trying to
reassure me. "You are of gentle birth. Of that we feel sure."

I shook my head. "Nay, I am of no birth, madam," I answered hurriedly.
"I have no name, or at any rate no name that I can be proud of. Call
me--call me, if it please you, Francis Carey."

"It is a good name," quoth Master Bertie, pausing with his knife
suspended in the air. "A right good Protestant name!"

"But I have no claim to it," I rejoined, mere and more hurt. "I have
all to make. I am a new man. Yet do not fear!" I added quickly, as I
saw what I took to be a cloud of doubt cross my lady's face. "I will
follow you no less faithfully for that!"

"Well," said the Duchess, a smile again transforming her open
features, "I will answer for that, Master Carey. Deeds are better than
names, and as for being a new man, what with Pagets and Cavendishes
and Spencers, we have nought but new men nowadays. So, cheer up!" she
continued kindly. "And we will poke no questions at you, though I
doubt whether you do not possess more birth and breeding than you
would have us think. And if, when we return to England, as I trust we
may before we are old men and women, we can advance your cause, then
let us have your secret. No one can say that Katherine Willoughby ever
forgot her friend."

"Or forgave her enemy over quickly," quoth her husband navely.

She rapped his knuckles with the back of her knife for that; and under
cover of this small diversion I had time to regain my composure. But
the matter left me sore at heart, and more than a little homesick. And
I sought leave to retire early.

"You are right!" said the Duchess, rising graciously. "To-night, after
being out in the air, you will sleep soundly, and to-morrow you will
be a new man," with a faint smile. "Believe me, I am not ungrateful,
Master Francis, and I will diligently seek occasion to repay both your
gallant defense of the other day and your future service." She gave me
her hand to kiss, and I bent over it. "Now," she continued, "do homage
to my baby, and then I shall consider that you are really one of us,
and pledged to our cause."

I kissed the tiny fist held out to me, a soft pink thing looking like
some dainty sea-shell. Master Bertie cordially grasped my hand. And so
under the oil-lamp in the neat cabin of that old Dutch boat, somewhere
on the Waal between Gorcum and Nimuegen, we plighted our troth to one
another, and in a sense I became one of them.


I went to my berth cheered and encouraged by their kindness. But the
interview, satisfactory as it was, had set up no little excitement in
my brain, and it was long before I slept. When I did I had a strange
dream. I dreamed that I was sitting in the hall at Coton, and that
Petronilla was standing on the dais looking fixedly at me with gentle,
sorrowful eyes. I wanted to go to her, but I could not move; every
dreamer knows the sensation. I tried to call to her, to ask her what
was the matter, and why she so looked at me. But I could utter no
sound. And still she continued to fix me with the same sad,
reproachful eyes, in which I read a warning, yet could not ask its
meaning.

I struggled so hard that at last the spell was in a degree broken.
Following the direction of her eyes I looked down at myself, and saw
fastened to the breast of my doublet the knot of blue velvet which she
had made for my sword-hilt, and which I had ever since carried in my
bosom. More, I saw, with a singular feeling of anger and sorrow, that
a hand which came over my shoulder was tugging hard at the ribbon in
the attempt to remove it.

This gave me horrible concern, yet at the moment I could not move nor
do anything to prevent it. At last, making a stupendous effort, I
awoke, my last experience, dreaming, being of the strange hand working
at my breast. My first waking idea was the same, so that I threw out
my arms, and cried aloud, and sat up. "Ugh!" I exclaimed, trembling in
the intensity of my relief, as I looked about and welcomed the now
familiar surroundings. "It was only a dream. It was----"

I stopped abruptly, my eyes falling on a form lurking in the doorway.
I could see it only dimly by the light of a hanging lamp, which smoked
and burned redly overhead. Yet I could see it. It was real,
substantial--a waking figure; nevertheless, a faint touch of
superstitious terror still clung to me. "Speak, please!" I asked. "Who
is it?"

"It is only I," answered a soft voice, well known to me--Mistress
Anne's. "I came in to see how you were," she continued, advancing a
little, "and whether you were sleeping. I am afraid I awoke you. But
you seemed," she added, "to be having such painful dreams that perhaps
it was as well I did."

I was fumbling in my breast while she spoke; and certainly, whether in
my sleep I had undone the fastenings or had loosened them
intentionally before I lay down (though I could not remember doing
so), my doublet and shirt were open at the breast. The velvet knot was
safe, however, in that tiny inner pocket beside the letter, and I
breathed again. "I am very glad you did awake me!" I replied, looking
gratefully at her. "I was having a horrible dream. But how good it was
of you to think of me--and when you are not well yourself, too."

"Oh, I am better," she murmured, her eyes, which glistened in the
light, fixed steadily on me. "Much better. Now go to sleep again, and
happier dreams to you. After to-night," she added pleasantly, "I shall
no longer consider you as an invalid, nor intrude upon you."

And she was gone before I could reiterate my thanks. The door fell to,
and I was alone, full of kindly feelings toward her, and of
thankfulness that my horrible vision had no foundation. "Thank
Heaven!" I murmured more than once, as I lay down; "it was only a
dream."


Next day we reached Nimuegen, where we stayed a short time. Leaving
that place in the afternoon, twenty-four hours' journeying, partly by
river, partly, if I remember rightly, by canal, brought us to the
neighborhood of Arnheim on the Rhine. It was the 1st of March, but the
opening month belied its reputation. There was a brightness, a
softness in the air, and a consequent feeling as of spring which would
better have befitted the middle of April. All day we remained on deck
enjoying the kindliness of nature, which was especially grateful to
me, in whom the sap of health was beginning to spring again; and we
were still there when one of those gorgeous sunsets which are peculiar
to that country began to fling its hues across our path. We turned a
jutting promontory, the boat began to fall off, and the captain came
up, his errand to tell us that our journey was done.

We went eagerly forward at the news, and saw in a kind of bay, formed
by a lake-like expansion of the river, a little island green and low,
its banks trimly set with a single row of poplars. It was perhaps a
quarter of a mile every way, and a channel one-fourth as wide
separated it from the nearer shore of the river; to which, however, a
long narrow bridge of planks laid on trestles gave access. On the
outer side of the island, facing the river's course, stood a low white
house, before which a sloping green terrace, also bordered with
poplars, led down to a tiny pier. Behind and around the house were
meadows as trim and neat as a child's toys, over which the eye roved
with pleasure until it reached the landward side of the island, and
there detected, nestling among gardens, a tiny village of half a dozen
cottages. It was a scene of enchanting peace and quietude. As we
slowly plowed our way up to the landing-place, I saw the rabbits stand
to gaze at us, and then with a flick of their heels dart off to their
holes. I marked the cattle moving homeward in a string, and heard the
wild fowl rise in creek and pool with a whir of wings. I turned with a
full heart to my neighbor. "Is it not lovely?" I cried with
enthusiasm. "Is it not a peaceful place--a very Garden of Eden?"

I looked to see her fall into raptures such as women are commonly more
prone to than men. But all women are not the same. Mistress Anne was
looking, indeed, when I turned and surprised her, at the scene which
had so moved me, but the expression of her face was sad and bitter and
utterly melancholy. The weariness and fatigue I had often seen lurking
in her eyes had invaded all her features. She looked five years older;
no longer a girl, but a gray-faced, hopeless woman whom the sight of
this peaceful haven rather smote to the heart than filled with
anticipations of safety and repose.

It was but for a moment I saw her so. Then she dashed her hand across
her eyes--though I saw no tears in them--and with a pettish
exclamation turned away. "Poor girl!" I thought. "She, too, is
homesick. No doubt this reminds her of some place at home, or of some
person." I thought this the more likely, as Master Bertie came from
Lincolnshire, which he said had many of the features of this strange
land. And it was conceivable enough that she should know Lincolnshire
too, being related to his wife.

I soon forgot the matter in the excitement of landing. A few minutes
of bustle and it was over. The boat put out again; and we four were
left face to face with two strangers, an elderly man and a girl, who
had come down to the pier to meet us. The former, stout, bluff, and
red-faced, with a thick gray beard and a gold chain about his neck,
had the air of a man of position. He greeted us warmly. His companion,
who hung behind him, somewhat shyly, was as pretty a girl as one could
find in a month. A second look assured me of something more--that she
formed an excellent foil to the piquant brightness and keen vivacity,
the dark hair and nervous features of Mistress Anne. For the Dutch
girl was fair and plump and of perfect complexion. Her hair was very
light, almost flaxen indeed, and her eyes were softly and limpidly
blue; grave, innocent, wondering eyes they were, I remember. I guessed
rightly that she was the elderly man's daughter. Later I learned that
she was his only child, and that her name was Dymphna.

He was a Master Lindstrom, a merchant of standing in Arnheim. He had
visited England and spoke English fairly, and being under some
obligations, it appeared, to the Duchess Katherine, was to be our
host.

We all walked up the little avenue together. Master Lindstrom talking
as he went to husband or wife, while his daughter and Mistress Anne
came next, gazing each at each in silence, as women when they first
meet will gaze, taking stock, I suppose, of a rival's weapons. I
walked last, wondering why they had nothing to say to one another.

As we entered the house the mystery was explained. "She speaks no
English," said Mistress Anne, with a touch of scorn.

"And we no Dutch," I answered, smiling. "Here in Holland I am afraid
that she will have somewhat the best of us. Try her with Spanish."

"Spanish! I know none."

"Well, I do, a little."

"What, you know Spanish?" Mistress Anne's tone of surprise amounted
almost to incredulity, and it flattered me, boy that I was. I dare say
it would have flattered many an older head than mine. "You know
Spanish? Where did you learn it?" she continued sharply.

"At home."

"At home! Where is that?" And she eyed me still more closely. "Where
is your home, Master Carey? You have never told me."

But I had said already more than I intended, and I shook my head. "I
mean," I explained awkwardly, "that I learned it in a home I once had.
Now my home is here. At any rate I have no other."

The Dutch girl, standing patiently beside us, had looked first at one
face and then at the other as we talked. We were all by this time in a
long, low parlor, warmed by a pretty closed fireplace covered with
glazed tiles. On the shelves of a great armoire, or dresser, at one
end of the room appeared a fine show of silver plate. At the other end
stood a tall linen-press of walnut-wood, handsomely carved; and even
the gratings of the windows and the handles of the doors were of
hammered iron-work. There were no rushes on the floor, which was made
of small pieces of wood delicately joined and set together and
brightly polished. But everything in sight was clean and trim to a
degree which would have shamed our great house at Coton, where the
rushes sometimes lay for a week unchanged. With each glance round I
felt a livelier satisfaction. I turned to Mistress Dymphna.

"Seorita!" I said, mustering my noblest accent. "Beso los pies de
usted! Habla usted Castillano?"

Mistress Anne stared, while the effect on the girl whom I addressed
was greater than I had looked for, but certainly of a different kind.
She started and drew back, an expression of offended dignity and of
something like anger ruffling her placid face. Did she not understand?
Yes, for after a moment's hesitation, and with a heightened color, she
answered, "Si, Seor."

Her constrained manner was not promising, but I was going on to open a
conversation if I could--for it looked little grateful of us to stand
there speechless and staring--when Mistress Anne interposed. "What did
you say to her? What was it?" she asked eagerly.

"I asked her if she spoke Spanish. That was all," I replied, my eyes
on Dymphna's face, which still betrayed trouble of some kind, "except
that I paid her the usual formal compliment. But what is she saying to
her father?"

It was like the Christmas game of cross-questions. The girl and I had
spoken in Spanish. I translated what we had said into English for
Mistress Anne, and Mistress Dymphna turned it into Dutch for her
father; an anxious look on her face which needed no translation.

"What is it?" asked Master Bertie, observing that something was wrong.

"It is nothing--nothing!" replied the merchant apologetically, though,
as he spoke, his eyes dwelt on me curiously. "It is only that I did
not know that you had a Spaniard in your company."

"A Spaniard?" Master Bertie answered. "We have none. This," pointing
to me, "is our very good friend and faithful follower, Master
Carey--an Englishman."

"To whom," added the Duchess, smiling gravely, "I am greatly
indebted."

I hurriedly explained the mistake, and brought at once a smile of
relief to the Mynheer's face. "Ah! pardon me, I beseech you," he said.
"My daughter was in error." And he added something in Dutch which
caused Mistress Dymphna to blush. "You know," he continued--"I may
speak freely to you, since our enemies are in the main the same--you
know that our Spanish rulers are not very popular with us, and grow
less popular every day, especially with those who are of the reformed
faith. We have learned some of us to speak their language, but we love
them none the better for that."

"I can sympathize with you, indeed," cried the Duchess impulsively.
"God grant that our country may never be in the same plight: though it
looks as if this Spanish marriage were like to put us in it. It is
Spain! Spain! Spain! and nothing else nowadays!"

"Nevertheless, the Emperor is a great and puissant monarch," rejoined
the Arnheimer thoughtfully; "and could he rule us himself, we might do
well. But his dominions are so large, he knows little of us. And
worse, he is dying, or as good as dying. He can scarcely sit his
horse, and rumor says that before the year is out he will resign the
throne. Then we hear little good of his successor, your queen's
husband, and look to hear less. I fear that there is a dark time
before us, and God only knows the issue."

"And alone will rule it," Master Bertie rejoined piously.

This saying was in a way the keynote to the life we found our host
living on his island estate. Peace, but peace with constant fear for
an assailant, and religion for a supporter. Several times a week
Master Lindstrom would go to Arnheim to superintend his business, and
always after his return he would shake his head, and speak gravely,
and Dymphna would lose her color for an hour or two. Things were going
badly. The reformers were being more and more hardly dealt with. The
Spaniards were growing more despotic. That was his constant report.
And then I would see him, as he walked with us in orchard or garden,
or sat beside the stove, cast wistful glances at the comfort and
plenty round him. I knew that he was asking himself how long they
would last. If they escaped the clutches of a tyrannical government,
would they be safe in the times that were coming from the violence of
an ill-paid soldiery? The answer was doubtful, or rather it was too
certain.

I sometimes wondered how he could patiently foresee such
possibilities, and take no steps, whatever the risk, to prevent them.
At first I thought his patience sprang from the Dutch character. Later
I traced its deeper roots to a simplicity of faith and a deep
religious feeling, which either did not at that time exist in England,
or existed only among people with whom I had never come into contact.
Here they seemed common enough and real enough. These folks' faith
sustained them. It was a part of their lives; a bulwark against the
fear that otherwise would have overwhelmed them. And to an extent,
too, which then surprised me, I found, as time went on, that the
Duchess and Master Bertie shared this enthusiasm, although with them
it took a less obtrusive form.

I was led at the time to think a good deal about this; and just a word
I may say of myself, and of those days spent on the Rhine inland--that
whereas before I had taken but a lukewarm interest in religious
questions, and, while clinging instinctively to the teaching of my
childhood, had conformed with a light heart rather than annoy my
uncle, I came to think somewhat differently now; differently and more
seriously. And so I have continued to think since, though I have never
become a bigot; a fact I owe, perhaps, to Mistress Dymphna, in whose
tender heart there was room for charity as well as faith. For she was
my teacher.

Of necessity, since no other of our party could communicate with her,
I became more or less the Dutch girl's companion. I would often, of an
evening, join her on a wooden bench which stood under an elm on a
little spit of grass looking toward the city, and at some distance
from the house. Here, when the weather was warm, she would watch for
her father's return; and here one day, while talking with her, I had
the opportunity of witnessing a sight unknown in England, but which
year by year was to become more common in the Netherlands, more
heavily fraught with menace in Netherland eyes.

We happened to be so deeply engaged in watching the upper end of the
reach at the time in question, where we expected each moment to see
Master Lindstrom's boat round the point, that we saw nothing of a boat
coming the other way, until the flapping of its sails, as it tacked,
drew our eyes toward it. Even then in the boat itself I saw nothing
strange, but in its passengers I did. They were swarthy, mustachioed
men, who in the hundred poses they assumed, as they lounged on deck or
leaned over the side, never lost a peculiar air of bravado. As they
drew nearer to us the sound of their loud voices, their oaths and
laughter reached us plainly, and seemed to jar on the evening
stillness. Their bold, fierce eyes, raking the banks unceasingly,
reached us at last. The girl by my side uttered a cry of alarm, and
rose as if to retreat. But she sat down again, for behind us was an
open stretch of turf, and to escape unseen was impossible. Already a
score of eyes had marked her beauty, and as the boat drew abreast of
us, I had to listen to the ribald jests and laughter of those on
board. My ears tingled and my cheeks burned. But I could do nothing. I
could only glare at them, and grind my teeth.

"Who are they?" I muttered. "The cowardly knaves!'

"Oh, hush! hush!" the girl pleaded. She had retreated behind me. And
indeed I need not have put my question, for though I had never seen
the Spanish soldiery, I had heard enough about them to recognize them
now. In the year 1555 their reputation was at its height. Their
fathers had overcome the Moors after a contest of centuries, and they
themselves had overrun Italy and lowered the pride of France. As a
result they had many military virtues and all the military vices.
Proud, bloodthirsty, and licentious everywhere, it may be imagined
that in the subject Netherlands, with their pay always in arrear, they
were, indeed, people to be feared. It was seldom that even their
commanders dared to check their excesses.

Yet, when the first flush of my anger had subsided, I looked after
them, odd as it may seem, with mingled feelings. With all their faults
they were few against many, a conquering race in a foreign land. They
could boast of blood and descent. They were proud to call themselves
the soldiers and gentlemen of Europe. I was against them, yet I
admired them with a boy's admiration for the strong and reckless.

Of course I said nothing of this to my companion. Indeed, when she
spoke to me I did not hear her. My thoughts had flown far from the
burgher's daughter sitting by me, and were with my grandmother's
people. I saw, in imagination, the uplands of Old Castile, as I had
often heard them described, hot in summer and bleak in winter. I
pictured the dark, frowning walls of Toledo, with its hundred Moorish
trophies, the castles that crowned the hills around, the gray olive
groves, and the box-clad slopes. I saw Palencia, where my grandmother,
Petronilla de Vargas, was born; Palencia, dry and brown and sun-baked,
lying squat and low on its plain, the eaves of its cathedral a man's
height from the ground. All this I saw. I suppose the Spanish blood in
me awoke and asserted itself at sight of those other Spaniards. And
then--then I forgot it all as I heard behind me an alien voice, and I
turned and found Dymphna had stolen from me and was talking to a
stranger.




                             CHAPTER IX.

                          PLAYING WITH FIRE.


He was a young man, and a Dutchman, but not a Dutchman of the stout,
burly type which I had most commonly seen in the country. He had, it
is true, the usual fair hair and blue eyes, and he was rather short
than tall; but his figure was thin and meager, and he had a pointed
nose and chin, and a scanty fair beard. I took him to be nearsighted:
at a second glance I saw that he was angry. He was talking fast to
Dymphna--of course in Dutch--and my first impulse, in face of his
excited gestures and queer appearance, was to laugh. But I had a
notion what his relationship to the girl was, and I smothered this,
and instead asked, as soon as I could get a word in, whether I should
leave them.

"Oh, no!" Dymphna answered, blushing slightly, and turning to me with
a troubled glance. I believe she had clean forgotten my presence.
"This is Master Jan Van Tree, a good friend of ours. And this," she
continued, still in Spanish, but speaking to him, "is Master Carey,
one of my father's guests."

We bowed, he formally, for he had not recovered his temper, and I--I
dare say I still had my Spanish ancestors in my head--with
condescension. We disliked one another at sight, I think. I dubbed him
a mean little fellow, a trader, a peddler; and, however he classed me,
it was not favorably. So it was no particular desire to please him
which led me to say with outward solicitude, "I fear you are annoyed
at something, Master Van Tree?"

"I am!" he said bluntly, meeting me half-way.

"And am I to know the cause?" I asked, "or is it a secret?"

"It is no secret!" he retorted. "Mistress Lindstrom should have been
more careful. She should not have exposed herself to the chance of
being seen by those miserable foreigners."

"The foreigners--in the boat?" I said dryly.

"Yes, of course--in the boat," he answered. He was obliged to say
that, but he glared at me across her as he spoke. We had turned and
were walking back to the house, the poplars casting long shadows
across our path.

"They were rude," I observed carelessly, my chin very high. "But there
is no particular harm done that I can see, Master Van Tree."

"Perhaps not, as far as you can see," he retorted in great excitement.
"But perhaps also you are not very far-sighted. You may not see it
now, yet harm will follow."

"Possibly," I said, and I was going to follow up this seemingly candid
admission by something very boorish, when Mistress Dymphna struck in
nervously.

"My father is anxious," she explained, speaking to me, "that I should
have as little to do with our Spanish governors as possible, Master
Carey. It always vexes him to hear that I have fallen in their way,
and that is why my friend feels annoyed. It was not, of course, your
fault, since you did not know of this. It was I," she continued
hurriedly, "who should not have ventured to the elm tree without
seeing that the coast was clear."

I knew that she was timidly trying, her color coming and going, to
catch my eye; to appease me as the greater stranger, and to keep the
peace between her ill-matched companions, who, indeed, stalked along
eying one another much as a wolf-hound and a badger-dog might regard
each other across a choice bone. But the young Dutchman's sudden
appearance had put me out. I was not in love with her, yet I liked to
talk to her, and I grudged her to him, he seemed so mean a fellow. And
so--churl that I was--in answer to her speech I let drop some sneer
about the great fear of the Spaniards which seemed to prevail in these
parts.

"_You_ are not afraid of them, then?" Van Tree said, with a smile.

"No, I am not," I answered, my lip curling also.

"Ah!" with much meaning. "Perhaps you do not know them very well."

"Perhaps not," I replied. "Still, my grandmother was a Spaniard."

"So I should have thought," he retorted swiftly.

So swiftly that I felt the words as I should have felt a blow. "What
do you mean?" I blurted out, halting before him, with my cheek
crimson. In vain were all Dymphna's appealing glances, all her signs
of distress. "I will have you explain, Master Van Tree, what you mean
by that?" I repeated fiercely.

"I mean what I said," he answered, confronting me stubbornly, and
shaking off Dymphna's hand. His blue eyes twinkled with rage, his thin
beard bristled; he was the color of a turkey-cock's comb. At home we
should have thought him a comical little figure; but he did not seem
so absurd here. For one thing, he looked spiteful enough for anything;
and for another, though I topped him by a head and shoulders, I could
not flatter myself that he was afraid of me. On the contrary, I felt
that in the presence of his mistress, small and short-sighted as he
was, he would have faced a lion without winking.

His courage was not to be put to the proof. I was still glaring at
him, seeking some retort which should provoke him beyond endurance,
when a hand was laid on my shoulder, and I turned to find that Master
Bertie and the Duchess had joined us.

"So here are the truants," the former said pleasantly, speaking in
English, and showing no consciousness whatever of the crisis in the
middle of which he had come up, though he must have discerned in our
defiant attitudes, and in Dymphna's troubled face, that something was
wrong. "You know who this is, Master Francis," he continued heartily.
"Or have you not been introduced to Master Van Tree, the betrothed of
our host's daughter?"

"Mistress Dymphna has done me that honor," I said stiffly, recovering
myself in appearance, while at heart sore and angry with everybody.
"But I fear the Dutch gentleman has not thanked her for the
introduction, since he learned that my grandmother was Spanish."

"_Your_ grandmother, do you mean?" cried the Duchess, much astonished.

"Yes, madam."

"Well, to be sure!" she exclaimed, lifting up her hands and appealing
whimsically to the others. "This boy is full of starts and surprises.
You never know what he will produce next. The other day it was a
warrant! To-day it is a grandmother, and a temper!"

I could not be angry with her; and perhaps I was not sorry now that my
quarrel with the young Dutchman had stopped where it had. I affected,
as well as I could, to join in the laugh at my expense, and took
advantage of the arrival of our host--who at this moment came up the
slope from the landing-place, his hands outstretched and a smile of
greeting on his kindly face--to slip away unnoticed, and make amends
to my humor by switching off the heads of the withes by the river.

But naturally the scene left a degree of ill-feeling behind it; and
for the first time, during the two months we had spent under Master
Lindstrom's roof, the party who sat down to supper were under some
constraint. I felt that the young Dutchman had had the best of the
bout in the garden; and I talked loudly and foolishly in the boyish
attempt to assert myself, and to set myself right at least in my own
estimation. Master Van Tree meanwhile sat silent, eying me from time
to time in no friendly fashion. Dymphna seemed nervous and frightened,
and the Duchess and her husband exchanged troubled glances. Only our
host and Mistress Anne, who was in particularly good spirits, were
unaffected by the prevailing chill.


Mistress Anne, indeed, in her ignorance, made matters worse. She had
begun to pick up some Dutch, and was fond of airing her knowledge and
practicing fresh sentences at meal-times. By some ill-luck she
contrived this evening--particularly after, finding no one to
contradict me, I had fallen into comparative silence--to frame her
sentences so as to cause as much embarrassment as possible to all of
us. "Where did you walk with Dymphna this morning?" was the question
put to me. "You are fond of the water; Englishmen are fond of the
water," she said to Dymphna. "Dymphna is tall; Master Francis is tall.
I sit by you to-night; the Dutch lady sat by you last night," and
soon, and so on, with prattle which seemed to amuse our host
exceedingly--he was never tired of correcting her mistakes--but which
put the rest of us out of countenance, bringing the tears to poor
Dymphna's eyes--she did not know where to look--and making her lover
glower at me as though he would eat me.

It was in vain that the Duchess made spasmodic rushes into
conversation, and in the intervals nodded and frowned at the
delinquent. Mistress Anne in her innocence saw nothing. She went on
until Van Tree could stand it no longer, and with a half-smothered
threat, which was perfectly intelligible to me, rose roughly from the
table, and went to the door as if to look out at the night.

"What is the matter?" Mistress Anne said, wonderingly, in English. Her
eyes seemed at length to be opened to the fact that something was
amiss with us.

Before I could answer, the Duchess, who had risen, came behind her.
"You little fool!" she whispered fiercely, "if fool you are. You
deserve to be whipped!"

"Why, what have I done?" murmured the girl, really frightened now, and
appealing to me.

"Done!" whispered the Duchess; and I think she pinched her, for my
neighbor winced. "More harm than you guess, you minx! And for you,
Master Francis, a word with you. Come with me to my room, please."

I went with her, half-minded to be angry, and half-inclined to feel
ashamed of myself. She did not give me time, however, to consider
which attitude I should take up, for the moment the door of her room
was closed behind us, she turned upon me, the color high in her
cheeks. "Now, young man," she said in a tone of ringing contempt, "do
you really think that that girl is in love with you?"

"What girl?" I asked sheepishly. The unexpected question and her tone
put me out of countenance.

"What girl? What girl?" she replied impatiently. "Don't play with me,
boy! You know whom I mean. Dymphna Lindstrom!"

"Oh, I thought you meant Mistress Anne," I said, somewhat
impertinently.

Her face fell in an extraordinary fashion, as if the suggestion were
not pleasant to her. But she answered on the instant: "Well! The
vanity of the lad! Do you think all the girls are in love with you?
Because you have been sitting with a pretty face on each side of you,
do you think you have only to throw the handkerchief, this way or
that? If you do, open your eyes, and you will find it is not so. My
kinswoman can take care of herself, so we will leave her out of the
discussion, please. And for this pink and white Dutch girl," my lady
continued viciously, "let me tell you that she thinks more of Van
Tree's little finger than of your whole body."

I shrugged my shoulders, but still I was mortified. A young man may
not be in love with a girl, yet it displeases him to hear that she is
indifferent to him.

The Duchess noticed the movement. "Don't do that," she cried in
impatient scorn. "You do not see much in Master Van Tree, perhaps? I
thought not. Therefore you think a girl must be of the same mind as
yourself. Well," with a fierce little nod, "you will learn some day
that it is not so, that women are not quite what men think them; and
particularly, Master Francis, that six feet of manhood, and a pretty
face on top of it, do not always have their way. But there, I did not
bring you here to tell you that. I want to know whether you are aware
what you are doing?"

I muttered something to the effect that I did not know I was doing any
harm.

"You do not call it harm, then," the Duchess retorted with energy, "to
endanger the safety of every one of us? Cannot you see that if you
insult and offend this young man--which you are doing out of pure
wanton mischief, for you are not in love with the girl--he may ruin
us?"

"Ruin us?" I repeated incredulously.

"Yes, ruin us!" she cried. "Here we are, living more or less in hiding
through the kindness of Master Lindstrom--living in peace and
quietness. But do you suppose that inquiries are not being made for
us? Why, I would bet a dozen gold angels that Master Clarence is in
the Netherlands, at this moment, tracking us."

I was startled by this idea, and she saw I was. "We can trust Master
Lindstrom, were it only for his own sake," she continued more quietly,
satisfied perhaps with the effect she had produced. "And this young
man, who is the son of one of the principal men of Arnheim, is also
disposed to look kindly on us, as I fancy it is his nature to look.
But if you make mischief between Dymphna and him----"

"I have not," I said.

"Then do not," she replied sharply. "Look to it for the future. And
more, do not let him fancy it possible. Jealousy is as easily awakened
as it is hardly put to sleep. A word from this young man to the
Spanish authorities, and we should be hauled back to England in a
trice, if worse did not befall us here. Now, you will be careful?"

"I will," I said, conscience-stricken and a little cowed.

"That is better," she replied smiling. "I think you will. Now go."

I went down again with some food for thought--with some good
intentions, too. But I was to find--the discovery is made by
many--that good resolutions commonly come too late. When I went
downstairs I found my host and Master Bertie alone in the parlor. The
girls had disappeared, so had Van Tree, and I saw at once that
something had happened. Master Bertie was standing gazing at the stove
very thoughtfully, and the Dutchman was walking up and down the room
with an almost comical expression of annoyance and trouble on his
pleasant face.

"Where are the young ladies?" I asked.

"Upstairs," said Master Bertie, not looking at me.

"And--and Van Tree?" I asked mechanically. Somehow I anticipated the
answer.

"Gone!" said the Englishman curtly.

"Ay, gone, the foolish lad!" the Dutchman struck in, tugging at his
beard. "What has come to him? He is not wont to show temper. I have
never known him and Dymphna have a cross word before. What has come to
the lad, I say, to go off in a passion at this time of night? And no
one knows whither he has gone, or when he will come back again!"

He seemed as he spoke hardly conscious of my presence; but Master
Bertie turned and looked at me, and I hung my head, and very shortly
afterward, I slunk out. The thought of what I might have brought upon
us all by my petulance and vanity made me feel sick. I crept up to bed
nervous and fearful of the morrow, listening to every noise without,
and praying inwardly that my alarm might not be justified.


When the morrow came I went downstairs as anxious to see Van Tree in
the flesh as I had been yesterday disappointed by his appearance. But
no Van Tree was there to be seen. Nothing had been heard of him.
Dymphna moved restlessly about, her cheeks pale, her eyes downcast,
and if I had ever flattered myself that I was anything to the girl, I
was undeceived now. The Duchess shot angry glances at me from time to
time. Master Bertie kept looking anxiously at the door. Every one
seemed to fear and to expect something. But none of them feared and
expected it as I did.

"He must have gone home; he must have gone to Arnheim," said our host,
trying to hide his vexation. "He will be back in a day or two. Young
men will be young men."

But I found that the Duchess did not share the belief that Van Tree
had gone home; for in the course of the morning she took occasion,
when we were alone, to charge me to be careful not to come into
collision with him.

"How can I, now he has gone?" I said meekly, feeling I was in
disgrace.

"He has not gone far," replied the Duchess meaningly. "Depend upon it,
he will not go far out of sight unless there is more harm done than I
think, or he is very different from English lovers. But if you come
across him, I pray you to keep clear of him, Master Francis."

I nodded assent.

But of what weight are resolutions, with fate in the other scale! It
was some hours after this, toward two o'clock indeed, when Mistress
Anne came to me, looking flurried and vexed. "Have you seen Dymphna?"
she asked abruptly.

"No," I answered. "Why?"

"Because she is not in the house," the girl answered, speaking
quickly, "nor in the garden; and the last time I saw her she was
crossing the island toward the footbridge. I think she has gone that
way to be on the lookout--you can guess for whom [with a smile]. But I
am fearful lest she shall meet some one else, Master Francis; she is
wearing her gold chain, and one of the maids says that she saw two of
the Spanish garrison on the road near the end of the footbridge this
morning. That is the way by land to Arnheim, you know."

"That is bad," I said. "What is to be done?"

"You must go and look for her," Anne suggested. "She should not be
alone."

"Let her father go, or Master Bertie," I answered.

"Her father has gone down the river--to Arnheim, I expect; and Master
Bertie is fishing in a boat somewhere. It will take time to find him.
Why cannot you go? If she has crossed the footbridge she will not be
far away."

She seemed so anxious as she spoke for the Dutch girl's safety, that
she infected me with her fears, and I let myself be persuaded. After
all there might be danger, and I did not see what else was to be done.
Indeed, Mistress Anne did not leave me until she had seen me clear of
the orchard and half across the meadows toward the footbridge. "Mind
you bring her back," she cried after me. "Do not let her come alone!"
And those were her last words.

After we had separated I did think for a moment that it was a pity I
had not asked her to come with me. But the thought occurred too late,
and I strode on toward the head of the bridge, resolving that, as soon
as I had sighted Dymphna, I would keep away from her and content
myself with watching over her from a distance. As I passed by the
little cluster of cottages on the landward side of the island, I
glanced sharply about me, for I thought it not unlikely that Master
Van Tree might be lurking in the neighborhood. But I saw nothing
either of her or him. All was quiet, the air full of spring sunshine
and warmth and hope and the blossoms of fruit trees; and with an
indefinable pleasure, a feeling of escape from control and restraint,
I crossed the long footbridge, and set foot, almost for the first time
since our arrival--for at Master Lindstrom's desire we had kept very
close--on the river bank.

To the right a fair road or causeway along the waterside led to
Arnheim. At the point where I stood, this road on its way from the
city took a turn at right angles, running straight away from the river
to avoid a wide track of swamp and mere which lay on my left--a
quaking marsh many miles round, overgrown with tall rushes and sedges,
which formed the head of the bay in which our island lay. I looked up
the long, straight road to Arnheim, and saw only a group of travelers
moving slowly along it, their backs toward me. The road before me was
bare of passengers. Where, then, was Dymphna, if she had crossed the
bridge? In the last resort I scanned the green expanse of rushes and
willows, which stretched, with intervals of open water, as far as the
eye could reach on my left. It was all rustling and shimmering in the
light breeze, but my eye picked out one or two raised dykes which
penetrated it here and there, and served at once as pathways to islets
in the mere and as breastworks against further encroachments of the
river. Presently, on one of these, of which the course was fairly
defined by a line of willows, I made out the flutter of a woman's
hood. And I remembered that the day before I had heard Dymphna express
a wish to go to the marsh for some herb which grew there.

"Right!" I said, seating myself with much satisfaction on the last
post of the bridge. "She is safe enough there! And I will go no
nearer. It is only on the road she is likely to be in danger from our
Spanish gallants!"

My eyes, released from duty, wandered idly over the landscape for a
while, but presently returned to the dyke across the mere. I could not
now see Dymphna. The willows hid her, and I waited for her to
reappear. She did not, but some one else did; for by and by, on the
same path and crossing an interval between the willows, there came
into sight a man's form.

"Ho! ho!" I said, following it with my eyes. "So I may go home! Master
Van Tree is on the track. And now I hope they will make it up!" I
added pettishly.

Another second and I started up with a low cry. The sunlight had
caught a part of the man's dress, a shining something which flashed
back a point of intense light. The something I guessed at once was a
corselet, and it needed scarce another thought to apprise me that
Dymphna's follower was not Van Tree at all, but a Spanish soldier!

I lost no time; yet it took me a minute--a minute of trembling haste
and anxiety--to discover the path from the causeway on to the dyke.
When once I had stumbled on to the latter I found I had lost sight of
both figures; but I ran along at the top of my speed, calculating that
the two, who could not be far apart, the man being the nearer to me,
were about a quarter of a mile or rather more from the road. I had
gone one-half of this distance perhaps when a shrill scream in front
caused me to redouble my efforts. I expected to find the ruffian in
the act of robbing the girl, and clutched my cudgel--for, alas! I had
left my sword at home--more tightly in my grasp, so that it was an
immense relief to me when, on turning an angle in the dyke, I saw her
running toward me. Her face, still white with fear, however, and her
hair streaming loosely behind her, told how narrow had been her
escape--if escape it could be called. For about ten feet behind her,
the hood he had plucked off still in his grasp, came Master Spaniard,
hot-foot and panting, but gaining on her now with every stride.


[Illustration: I STOOD OVER HIM WATCHING HIM]


He was a tall fellow, gayly dressed, swarthy, mustachioed, and
fierce-eyed. His corselet and sword-belt shone and jingled as he ran
and swore; but he had dropped his feathered bonnet in the slight
struggle which had evidently taken place when she got by him; and it
lay a black spot in the middle of the grassy avenue behind him. The
sun--it was about three hours after noon--was at my back, and shining
directly into his eyes, and I marked this as I raised my cudgel and
jumped aside to let the girl pass; for she in her blind fear would
have run against me.

It was almost the same with him. He did not see me until I was within
a few paces of him, and even then I think he noticed my presence
merely as that of an unwelcome spectator. He fancied I should step
aside; and he cursed me, calling me a Dutch dog for getting in his
way.

The next moment--he had not drawn his sword nor made any attempt to
draw it--we came together violently, and I had my hand on his throat.
We swayed as we whirled round one another in the first shock of the
collision. A cry of astonishment escaped him--astonishment at my
hardihood. He tried, his eyes glaring into mine, and his hot breath on
my cheek, to get at his dagger. But it was too late. I brought down my
staff, with all the strength of an arm nerved at the moment by rage
and despair, upon his bare head.

He went down like a stone, and the blood bubbled from his lips. I
stood over him watching him. He stretched himself out and turned with
a convulsive movement on his face. His hands clawed the grass. His leg
moved once, twice, a third time faintly. Then he lay still.

There was a lark singing just over my head, and its clear notes
seemed, during the long, long minute while I stood bending over him in
an awful fascination, to be the only sounds in nature. I looked so
long at him in that dreadful stillness and absorption, I dared not at
last look up lest I should see I knew not what. Yet when a touch fell
on my arm I did not start.

"You have killed him!" the girl whispered, shuddering.

"Yes, I have killed him," I answered mechanically.

I could not take my eyes off him. It was not as if I had done this
thing after a long conflict, or in a _mle_ with others fighting
round me, or on the battle-field. I should have felt no horror then
such as I felt now, standing over him in the sunshine with the lark's
song in my ears. It had happened so quickly, and the waste about us
was so still; and I had never killed a man before, nor seen a man die.

"Oh, come away!" Dymphna wailed suddenly. "Come away!"

I turned then, and the sight of the girl's wan face and strained eyes
recalled me in some degree to myself. I saw she was ill; and hastily I
gave her my arm, and partly carried, partly supported, her back to the
road. The way seemed long and I looked behind me often. But we reached
the causeway at last, and there in the open I felt some relief. Yet
even then, stopping to cast a backward glance at the marsh, I
shuddered anew, espying a bright white spark gleaming amid the green
of the rushes. It was the dead man's corselet. But if it had been his
eye I could scarcely have shrunk from it in greater dread.

It will be imagined that we were not long in crossing the island.
Naturally I was full of what had happened, and never gave a thought to
Van Tree's jealousy, or the incidents of his short visit. I had indeed
forgotten his existence until we reached the porch. There entering
rapidly, with Dymphna clinging to my arm, I was so oblivious of other
matters that when the young Dutchman rose suddenly from the seat on
one side of the door, and at the same moment the Duchess rose from the
bench on the other, I did not understand in the first instant of
surprise what was the matter, though I let Dymphna's hand fall from my
arm. The dark scowling face of the one, however, and the anger and
chagrin written on the features of the other, as they both glared at
us, brought all back to me in a flash. But it was too late. Before I
could utter a word the girl's lover pushed by me with a fierce gesture
and fiercer cry, and disappeared round a corner of the house.

"Was ever such folly!" cried the Duchess, stamping her foot, and
standing before us, her face crimson. "Or such fools! You idiot!
You----"

"Hush, madam," I said sternly--had I really grown older in doing the
deed? "something has happened."

And Dymphna, with a low cry of "The Spaniard! The Spaniard!" tottered
up to her and fainted in her arms.




                              CHAPTER X.

                        THE FACE IN THE PORCH.


"This is a serious matter," said Master Bertie thoughtfully, as we sat
in conclave an hour later round the table in the parlor. Mistress Anne
was attending to Dymphna upstairs, and Van Tree had not returned
again; so that we had been unable to tell him of the morning's
adventure. But the rest of us were there. "It considerably adds to the
danger of our position," Bertie continued.

"Of course it does," his wife said promptly. "But Master Lindstrom
here can best judge of that, and of what course it will be safest to
take."

"It depends," our host answered slowly, "upon whether the dead man be
discovered before night. You see if the body be not found----"

"Well?" said my lady impatiently, as he paused.

"Then we must some of us go after dark and bury him," he decided. "And
perhaps, though he will be missed at the next roll-call in the city,
his death may not be proved, or traced to this neighborhood. In that
case the storm will blow over, and things be no worse than before."

"I fear there is no likelihood of that," I said; "for I am told he had
a companion. One of the maids noticed them lurking about the end of
the bridge more than once this morning."

Our host's face fell.

"That is bad," he said, looking at me in evident consternation. "Who
told you?"

"Mistress Anne. And one of the maids told her. It was that which led
me to follow your daughter."

The old man got up for about the fortieth time, and shook my hand,
while the tears stood in his eyes and his lip trembled. "Heaven bless
you, Master Carey!" he said. "But for you, my girl might not have
escaped."

He could not finish. His emotion choked him, and he sat down again.
The event of the morning--his daughter's danger, and my share in
averting it--had touched him as nothing else could have touched him. I
met the Duchess's eyes and they too were soft and shining, wearing an
expression very different from that which had greeted me on my return
with Dymphna.

"Ah, well! she is safe," Master Lindstrom resumed, when he had
regained his composure. "Thanks to Heaven and your friend, madam!
Small matter now if house and lands go!"

"Still, let us hope they will not," Master Bertie said. "Do you think
these miscreants were watching the island on our account? That some
information had been given as to our presence, and they were sent to
learn what they could?"

"No, no!" the Dutchman answered confidently. "It was the sight of the
girl and her gewgaws yesterday brought them--the villains! There is
nothing safe from them and nothing sacred to them. They saw her as
they passed up in the boat, you remember."

"But then, supposing the worst to come to the worst?"

"We must escape across the frontier to Wesel, in the Duchy of Cleves,"
replied Lindstrom in a matter-of-fact tone, as if he had long
considered and settled the point. "The distance is not great, and in
Wesel we may find shelter, at any rate for a time. Even there, if
pressure be brought to bear upon the Government to give us up, I would
not trust it. Yet for a time it may do."

"And you would leave all this?" the Duchess said in wonder, her eyes
traveling round the room, so clean and warm and comfortable, and
settling at length upon the great armoire of plate, which happened to
be opposite to her. "You would leave all this at a moment's notice?"

"Yes, madam, all we could not carry with us," he answered simply.
"Honor and life, these come first. And I thank Heaven that I live here
within reach of a foreign soil, and not in the interior, where escape
would be hopeless."

"But if the true facts were known," the Duchess urged, "would you
still be in danger? Would not the magistrates protect you? The Schout
and Schepen as you call them? They are Dutchmen."

"Against a Spanish governor and a Spanish garrison?" he replied with
emphasis. "Ay, they would protect me--as one sheep protects another
against the wolves. No! I dare not risk it. Were I in prison, what
would become of Dymphna?"

"Master Van Tree?"

"He has the will to shelter her, no doubt. And his father has
influence; but such as mine--a broken reed to trust to. Then Dymphna
is not all. Once in prison, whatever the charge, there would be
questioning about religion; perhaps," with a faint smile, "questioning
about my guests."

"I suppose you know best," said the Duchess, with a sigh. "But I hope
the worst will not come to the worst."

"Amen to that!" he answered quite cheerfully.

Indeed, it was strange that we seemed to feel more sorrow at the
prospect of leaving this haven of a few weeks, than our host of
quitting the home of a lifetime. But the necessity had come upon us
suddenly, while he had contemplated it for years. So much fear and
humiliation had mingled with his enjoyment of his choicest possessions
that this long-expected moment brought with it a feeling akin to
relief.

For myself I had a present trouble that outweighed any calamity of
to-morrow. Perforce, since I alone knew the spot where the man lay, I
must be one of the burying party. My nerves had not recovered from the
blow which the sight of the Spaniard lying dead at my feet had dealt
them so short a time before, and I shrank with a natural repulsion
from the task before me. Yet there was no escaping it, no chance of
escaping it, I saw.

None the less, throughout the silent meal to which we four sat down
together, neither the girls nor Van Tree appearing, were my thoughts
taken up with the business which was to follow. I heard our host, who
was to go with me, explaining that there was a waterway right up to
the dyke, and that we would go by boat; and heard him with apathy.
What matter how we went, if such were the object of our journey?
I wondered how the man's face would look when we came to turn him
over, and pictured it in all ghastliest shapes. I wondered whether I
should ever forget the strange spasmodic twitching of his leg, the
gurgle--half oath, half cry--which had come with the blood from his
throat. When Lindstrom said the moon was up and bade me come with him
to the boat, I went mechanically. No one seemed to suspect me of fear.
I suppose they thought that, as I had not feared to kill him, I should
not fear him dead. And in the general silence and moodiness I escaped
notice.


"It is a good night for the purpose," the Dutchman said, looking about
when we were outside. "It is light enough for us, yet not so light
that we run much risk of being seen."

I assented, shivering. The moon was almost at the full, and the
weather was dry, but scud after scud of thin clouds, sweeping across
the breezy sky, obscured the light from time to time, and left nothing
certain. We loosed the smallest boat in silence, and getting in,
pulled gently round the lower end of the island, making for the fringe
of rushes which marked the line of division between river and fen. We
could hear the frogs croaking in the marsh, and the water lapping the
banks, and gurgling among the tree-roots, and making a hundred strange
noises to which daylight ears are deaf. Yet as long as I was in the
open water I felt bold enough. I kept my tremors for the moment when
we should brush through the rustling belt of reeds, and the willows
should whisper about our heads, and the rank vegetation, the
mysterious darkness of the mere should shut us in.

For a time I was to be spared this. Master Lindstrom suddenly stopped
rowing. "We have forgotten to bring a stone, lad," he said in a low
voice.

"A stone?" I answered, turning. I was pulling the stroke oar, and my
back was toward him. "Do we want a stone?"

"To sink the body," he replied. "We cannot bury it in the marsh, and
if we could it were trouble thrown away. We must have a stone."

"What is to be done?" I asked, leaning on my oar and shivering, as
much in impatience as nervousness. "Must we go back?"

"No, we are not far from the causeway now," he answered, with Dutch
coolness. "There are some big stones, I fancy, by the end of the
bridge. If not, there are some lying among the cottages just across
the bridge. Your eyes are younger than mine, so you had better go. I
will pull on, and land you."

I assented, and the boat's course being changed a point or two, three
minutes' rowing laid her bows on the mud, some fifty yards from the
landward bend of the bridge, and just in the shadow of the causeway. I
sprang ashore and clambered up. "Hist!" he cried, warning me as I was
about to start on my errand. "Go about it quietly, Master Francis. The
people will probably be in bed. But be secret."

I nodded and moved off, as warily as he could desire. I spent a minute
or two peering about the causeway, but I found nothing that would
serve our purpose. There was no course left then but to cross the
planks, and seek what I wanted in the hamlet. Remembering how the
timbers had creaked and clattered when I went over them in the
daylight, I stole across on tiptoe. I fancied I had seen a pile of
stones near one of the posts at that end, but I could not find them
now, and after groping about a while--for this part was at the moment
in darkness--I crept cautiously past the first hovel, peering to right
and left as I went. I did not like to confess to myself that I was
afraid to be alone in the dark, but that was nearly the truth. I was
feverishly anxious to find what I wanted and return to my companion.

Suddenly I paused and held my breath. A slight sound had fallen on my
ears, nervously ready to catch the slightest. I paused and listened.
Yes, there it was again; a whispering of cautious voices close by me,
within a few feet of me. I could see no one. But a moment's thought
told me that the speakers were hidden by the farther corner of the
cottage abreast of which I stood. The sound of human voices, the
assurance of living companionship, steadied my nerves, and to some
extent rid me of my folly. I took a step to one side, so as to be more
completely in the shadow cast by the reed-thatched eaves, and then
softly advanced until I commanded a view of the whisperers.

They were two, a man and a woman. And the woman was of all people
Dymphna! She had her back to me, but she stood in the moonlight, and I
knew her hood in a moment. The man--surely the man was Van Tree then,
if the woman was Dymphna? I stared. I felt sure it must be Van Tree.
It was wonderful enough that Dymphna should so far have regained nerve
and composure as to rise and come out to meet him. But in that case
her conduct, though strange, was explicable. If not, however, if the
man were not Van Tree----

Well, he certainly was not. Stare as I might, rub my eyes as I might,
I could not alter the man's figure, which was of the tallest, whereas
I have said that the young Dutchman was short. This man's face, too,
though it was obscured as he bent over the girl by his cloak, which
was pulled high up about his throat, was swarthy; swarthy and
beardless, I made out. More, his cap had a feather, and even as he
stood still I thought I read the soldier in his attitude. The soldier
and the Spaniard!

What did it mean? On what strange combination had I lit? Dymphna and a
Spaniard! Impossible. Yet a thousand doubts and thoughts ran riot in
my brain, a thousand conjectures jostled one another to get uppermost.
What was I to do? What ought I to do? Go nearer to them, as near as
possible, and listen and learn the truth? Or steal back the way I had
come, and fetch Master Lindstrom? But first, was it certain that the
girl was there of her own free will? Yes, the question was answered as
soon as put. The man laid his hand gently on her shoulder. She did not
draw back.

Confident of this, and consequently of Dymphna's bodily safety, I
hesitated, and was beginning to consider whether the best course might
not be to withdraw and say nothing, leaving the question of future
proceedings to be decided after I had spoken to her on the morrow,
when a movement diverted my thoughts. The man at last raised his head.
The moonlight fell cold and bright on his face, displaying every
feature as clearly as if it had been day. And though I had only once
seen his face before, I knew it again.

And knew him! In a second I was back in England, looking on a far
different scene. I saw the Thames, its ebb tide rippling in the
sunshine as it ripples past Greenwich, and a small boat gliding over
it, and a man in the bow of the boat, a man with a grim lip and a
sinister eye. Yes, the tall soldier talking to Dymphna in the
moonlight, his cap the cap of a Spanish guard, was Master Clarence!
the Duchess's chief enemy!

                          *   *   *   *   *

I stayed my foot. With a strange settling into resolve of all my
doubts I felt if my sword, which happily I had brought with me, was
loose in its sheath, and leaned forward scanning him. So he had
tracked us! He was here! With wonderful vividness I pictured all the
dangers which menaced the Duchess, Master Bertie, the Lindstroms,
myself, through his discovery of us, all the evils which would befall
us if the villain went away with his tale. Forgetting Dymphna's
presence, I set my teeth hard together. He should not escape me this
time.

But man can only propose. As I took a step forward, I trod on a round
piece of wood which turned under my foot, and I stumbled. My eye left
the pair for a second. When it returned to them they had taken the
alarm. Dymphna had started away, and I saw her figure retreating
swiftly in the direction of the house. The man poised himself a moment
irresolute opposite to me; then dashed aside and disappeared behind
the cottage.

I was after him on the instant, my sword out, and caught sight of his
cloak as he whisked round a corner. He dodged me twice round the next
cottage, the one nearer the river. Then he broke away and made for the
bridge, his object evidently to get off the island. But he seemed at
last to see that I was too quick for him--as I certainly was--and
should catch him half way across the narrow planking; and changing his
mind again he doubled nimbly back and rushed into the open porch of a
cottage, and I heard his sword ring out. I had him at bay.

At bay indeed! But ready as I was, and resolute to capture or kill
him, I paused. I hesitated to run in on him. The darkness of the porch
hid him, while I must attack with the moonlight shining on me. I
peered in cautiously. "Come out!" I cried. "Come out, you coward!"
Then I heard him move, and for a moment I thought he was coming, and I
stood a-tiptoe waiting for his rush. But he only laughed a derisive
laugh of triumph. He had the odds, and I saw he would keep them.

I took another cautious step toward him, and shading my eyes with
my left hand, tried to make him out. As I did so, gradually his face
took dim form and shape, confronting mine in the darkness. I stared
yet more intently. The face became more clear. Nay, with a sudden
leap into vividness, as it were, it grew white against the dark
background--white and whiter. It seemed to be thrust out nearer and
nearer, until it almost touched mine. It--his face? No, it was not his
face! For one awful moment a terror, which seemed to still my heart,
glued me to the ground where I stood, as it flashed upon my brain that
it was another face that grinned at me so close to mine, that it was
another face I was looking on; the livid, bloodstained face and stony
eyes of the man I had killed!

With a wild scream I turned and fled. By instinct, for terror had
deprived me of reason, I hied to the bridge, and keeping, I knew not
how, my footing upon the loose clattering planks, made one desperate
rush across it. The shimmering water below, in which I saw that face a
thousand times reflected, the breeze, which seemed the dead man's hand
clutching me, lent wings to my flight. I sprang at a bound from the
bridge to the bank, from the bank to the boat, and overturning, yet
never seeing, my startled companion, shoved off from the shore with
all my might--and fell a-crying.

A very learned man, physician to the Queen's Majesty has since told
me, when I related this strange story to him, that probably that burst
of tears saved my reason. It so far restored me at any rate that I
presently knew where I was--cowering in the bottom of the boat, with
my eyes covered; and understood that Master Lindstrom was leaning over
me in a terrible state of mind, imploring me in mingled Dutch and
English to tell him what had happened. "I have seen him!" was all I
could say at first, and I scarcely dared remove my hands from my eyes.
"I have seen him!" I begged my host to row away from the shore, and
after a time was able to tell him what the matter was, he sitting the
while with his arm round my shoulder.

"You are sure that it was the Spaniard?" he said kindly, after he had
thought a minute.

"Quite sure," I answered shuddering, yet with less violence. "How
could I be mistaken? If you had seen him----"

"And you are sure--did you feel his heart this morning? Whether it was
beating?"

"His heart?" Something in his voice gave me courage to look up, though
I still shunned the water, lest that dreadful visage should rise from
the depths. "No, I did not touch him."

"And you tell me that he fell on his face. Did you turn him over?"

"No." I saw his drift now. I was sitting erect. My brain began to work
again. "No," I admitted; "I did not."

"Then how----" asked the Dutchman roughly--"how do you know that he
was dead, young sir? Tell me that."

When I explained, "Bah!" he cried. "There is nothing in that! You
jumped to a conclusion. I thought a Spaniard's head was harder to
break. As for the blood coming from his mouth, perhaps he bit his
tongue, or did any one of a hundred things--except die, Master
Francis. That you may be sure is just what he did not do."

"You think so?" I said gratefully. I began to look about me, yet still
with a tremor in my limbs, and an inclination to start at shadows.

"Think?" he rejoined, with a heartiness which brought conviction home
tome; "I am sure of it. You may depend upon it that Master Clarence,
or the man you take for Master Clarence--who no doubt was the other
soldier seen with the scoundrel this morning--found him hurt late in
the evening. Then, seeing him in that state, he put him in the porch
for shelter, either because he could not get him to Arnheim at once,
or because he did not wish to give the alarm before he had made his
arrangements for netting your party."

"That is possible!" I allowed, with a sigh of relief. "But what of
Master Clarence?"

"Well," the old man said; "let us get home first. We will talk of him
afterward."

I felt he had more in his mind than appeared, and I obeyed; growing
ashamed now of my panic, and looking forward with no very pleasant
feelings to hearing the story narrated. But when we reached the house,
and found Master Bertie and the Duchess in the parlor waiting for
us--they rose startled at sight of my face--he bade me leave that out,
but tell the rest of the story.

I complied, describing how I had seen Dymphna meet Clarence, and what
I had observed to pass between them. The astonishment of my hearers
may be imagined. "The point is very simple," said our host coolly,
when I had, in the face of many exclamations and some incredulity,
completed the tale; "it is just this! The woman certainly was not
Dymphna. In the first place, she would not be out at night. In the
second place, what could she know of your Clarence, an Englishman and
a stranger? In the third place, I will warrant she has been in her
room all the evening. Then if Master Francis was mistaken in the
woman, may he not have been mistaken in the man? That is the point."

"No," I said boldly. "I only saw her back. I saw his face."

"Certainly, that is something," Master Lindstrom admitted reluctantly.

"But how many times had you seen him before?" put in my lady very
pertinently. "Only once."

In answer to that I could do no more than give further assurance of my
certainty on the point. "It was the man I saw in the boat at
Greenwich," I declared positively. "Why should I imagine it?"

"All the same, I trust you have," she rejoined. "For, if it was indeed
that arch scoundrel, we are undone."

"Imagination plays us queer tricks sometimes," Master Lindstrom said,
with a smile of much meaning. "But come, lad, I will ask Dymphna,
though I think it useless to do so. For whether you are right or wrong
as to your friend, I will answer for it you are wrong as to my
daughter."

He was rising to go from them for the purpose, when Mistress Anne
opened the door and came in. She looked somewhat startled at finding
us all in conclave. "I thought I heard your voices," she explained
timidly, standing between us and the door. "I could not sleep."

She looked indeed as if that were so. Her eyes were very bright, and
there was a bright spot of crimson in each cheek. "What is it?" she
went on abruptly, looking hard at me and shutting her lips tightly.
There was so much to explain that no one had taken it in hand to
begin.

"It is just this," the Duchess said, opening her mouth with a snap.
"Have you been with Dymphna all the time?"

"Yes, of course," was the prompt answer.

"What is she doing?"

"Doing?" Mistress Anne repeated in surprise. "She is asleep."

"Has she been out since nightfall?" the Duchess continued. "Out of her
room? Or out of the house?"

"Out? Certainly not. Before she fell asleep she was in no state to go
out, as you know, though I hope she will be all right when she awakes.
Who says she has been out?" Anne added sharply. She looked at me with
a challenge in her eyes, as much as to say, "Is it you?"

"I am satisfied," I said, "that I was mistaken as to Mistress Dymphna.
But I am just as sure as before that I saw Clarence."

"Clarence?" Mistress Anne repeated, starting violently, and the color
for an instant fleeing from her cheeks. She sat down on the nearest
seat.

"You need not be afraid, Anne," my lady said smiling. She had a
wonderfully high courage herself. "I think Master Francis was
mistaken, though he is so certain about it."

"But where--where did he see him?" the girl asked. She still trembled.

Once more I had to tell the tale; Mistress Anne, as was natural,
listening to it with the liveliest emotions. And this time so much of
the ghost story had to be introduced--for she pressed me closely as to
where I had left Clarence, and why I had let him go--that my
assurances got less credence than ever.

"I think I see how it is," she said, with a saucy scorn that hurt me
not a little. "Master Carey's nerves are in much the same state
to-night as Dymphna's. He thought he saw a ghost, and he did not. He
thought he saw Dymphna, and he did not. And he thought he saw Master
Clarence, and he did not."

"Not so fast, child!" cried the Duchess sharply, seeing me wince.
"Your tongue runs too freely. No one has had better proofs of Master
Carey's courage--for which I will answer myself--than we have!"

"Then he should not say things about Dymphna!" the young lady
retorted, her foot tapping the floor, and the red spots back in her
cheeks. "Such rubbish I never heard!"




                             CHAPTER XI.

                             A FOUL BLOW.


They none of them believed me, it seemed; and smarting under Mistress
Anne's ridicule, hurt by even the Duchess's kindly incredulity, what
could I do? Only assert what I had asserted already, that it was
undoubtedly Clarence, and that before twenty-four hours elapsed they
would have proof of my words.

At mention of this possibility Master Bertie looked up. He had left
the main part in the discussion to others, but now he intervened. "One
moment!" he said. "Take it that the lad is right, Master Lindstrom. Is
there any precaution we can adopt, any back door, so to speak, we can
keep open, in case of an attempt to arrest us being made? What would
be the line of our retreat to Wesel?"

"The river," replied the Dutchman promptly.

"And the boats are all at the landing-stage?"

"They are, and for that reason they are useless in an emergency," our
host answered thoughtfully. "Knowing the place, any one sent to
surprise and arrest us would secure them first, and the bridge. Then
they would have us in a trap. It might be well to take a boat round,
and moor it in the little creek in the farther orchard," he added,
rising. "It is a good idea, at any rate. I will go and do it."

He went out, leaving us four--the Duchess, her husband, Anne, and
myself--sitting round the lamp.

"If Master Carey is so certain that it was Clarence," my lady began,
"I think he ought to----"

"Yes, Kate?" her husband said. She had paused and seemed to be
listening.

"Ought to open that letter he has!" she continued impetuously. "I have
no doubt it is a letter to Clarence. Now the rogue has come on the
scene again, the lad's scruples ought not to stand in the way. They
are all nonsense. The letter may throw some light on the Bishop's
schemes and Clarence's presence here; and it should be read. That is
what I think."

"What do you say, Carey?" her husband asked, as I kept silence. "Is
not that reasonable?"

Sitting with my elbows on the table, I twisted and untwisted the
fingers of my clasped hands, gazing at them the while as though
inspiration might come of them. What was I to do? I knew that the
three pairs of eyes were upon me, and the knowledge distracted me, and
prevented me really thinking, though I seemed to be thinking so hard.
"Well," I burst out at last, "the circumstances are certainly altered.
I see no reason why I should not----"

Crash!

I stopped, uttering an exclamation, and we all sprang to our feet.
"Oh, what a pity!" the Duchess cried, clasping her hands. "You clumsy,
clumsy girl! What have you done?"

Mistress Anne's sleeve as she turned had swept from the table a
Florentine jug, one of Master Lindstrom's greatest treasures, and it
lay in a dozen fragments on the floor. We stood and looked at it, the
Duchess in anger, Master Bertie and I in comic dismay. The girl's lip
trembled, and she turned quite white as she contemplated the ruin she
had caused.

"Well, you have done it now!" the Duchess said pitilessly. What woman
could ever overlook clumsiness in another woman! "It only remains to
pick up the pieces, miss. If a man had done it--but there, pick up the
pieces. You will have to make your tale good to Master Lindstrom
afterward."

I went down on my knees and helped Anne, the annoyance her incredulity
had caused me forgotten. She was so shaken that I heard the bits of
ware in her hand clatter together. When we had picked up all, even to
the smallest piece, I rose, and the Duchess returned to the former
subject. "You will open this letter, then?" she said; "I see you will.
Then the sooner the better. Have you got it about you?"

"No, it is in my bedroom," I answered. "I hid it away there, and I
must fetch it. But do you think," I continued, pausing as I opened the
door for Mistress Anne to go out with her double handful of fragments,
"it is absolutely necessary to read it, my lady?"

"Most certainly," she answered, gravely nodding with each syllable, "I
think so. I will be responsible." And Master Bertie nodded also.

"So be it," I said reluctantly. And I was about to leave the room to
fetch the letter--my bedroom being in a different part of the house,
only connected with the main building by a covered passage--when our
host returned. He told us that he had removed a boat, and I stayed a
while to hear if he had anything more to report, and then, finding he
had not, went out to go to my room, shutting the door behind me.


The passage I have mentioned, which was merely formed of rough planks,
was very dark. At the nearer end was the foot of the staircase leading
to the upper rooms. Farther along was a door in the side opening into
the garden. Going straight out of the lighted room, I had almost to
grope my way, feeling the walls with my hands. When I had about
reached the middle I paused. It struck me that the door into the
garden must be open, for I felt a cold draught of air strike my brow,
and saw, or fancied I saw, a slice of night sky and the branch of a
tree waving against it. I took a step forward, slightly shivering in
the night air as I did so, and had stretched out my hand with the
intention of closing the door, when a dark form rose suddenly close to
me, I saw a knife gleam in the starlight, and the next moment I reeled
back into the darknesss of the passage, a sharp pain in my breast.

I knew at once what had happened to me, and leaned a moment against
the planking with a sick, faint feeling, saying to myself, "I have it
this time!" The attack had been so sudden and unexpected, I had been
taken so completely off my guard, that I had made no attempt either to
strike or to clutch my assailant, and I suppose only the darkness of
the passage saved me from another blow. But was one needed? The hand
which I had raised instinctively to shield my throat was wet with the
warm blood trickling fast down my breast. I staggered back to the door
of the parlor, groped blindly for the latch, seemed to be an age
finding it, found it at last, and walked in.

The Duchess sprang up at sight of me. "What," she cried, backing from
me, "what has happened?"

"I have been stabbed," I said, and I sat down.

It amused me afterward to recall what they all did. The Dutchman
stared, my lady screamed loudly, Master Bertie whipped out his sword;
he could make up his mind quickly enough at times.

"I think he has gone," I said faintly.

The words brought the Duchess to her knees by my chair. She tore open
my doublet, through which the blood was oozing fast. I made no doubt
that I was a dead man, for I had never been wounded in this way
before, and the blood scared me. I remember my prevailing idea was a
kind of stunned pity for myself. Perhaps later--I hope so--I should
have come to think of Petronilla and my uncle and other people. But
before this stage was readied, the Duchess reassured me. "Courage,
lad!" she cried heartily. "It is all right, Dick. The villain struck
him on the breastbone an inch too low, and has just ripped up a scrap
of skin. It has blooded him for the spring, that is all. A bit of
plaster----"

"And a drink of strong waters," suggested the Dutchman soberly--his
thoughts were always to the point when they came.

"Yes, that too," quoth my lady, "and he will be all right."

I thought so myself when I had emptied the cup they offered me. I had
been a good deal shaken by the events of the day. The sight of blood
had further upset me. I really think it possible I might have died of
this slight hurt and my imagination, if I had been left to myself. But
the Duchess's assurance and the draught of schnapps, which seemed to
send new blood through my veins, made me feel ashamed of myself. If
the Duchess would have let me, I would at once have gone to search the
premises; as it was, she made me sit still while she ran to and fro
for hot water and plaster, and the men searched the lower rooms and
secured the door afresh.

"And so you could see nothing of him?" our host asked, when he and
Master Bertie returned, weapons in hand. "Nothing of his figure or
face?"

"Nothing, save that he was short," I answered; "shorter than I am, at
any rate, and I fancy a good deal."

"A good deal shorter than you are?" my lady said uneasily; "that is no
clew. In this country nine people out of ten are that. Clarence, now,
is not."

"No," I said; "he is about the same height. It was not Clarence."

"Then who could it be?" she muttered, rising, and then with a quick
shudder sitting down again. "Heaven help us, we seem to be in the
midst of foes! What could be the motive? And why should the villain
have selected you? Why pick you out?"

Thereupon a strange thing happened. Three pairs of English eyes met,
and signaled a common message eye to eye. No word passed, but the
message was "Van Tree!" When we had glanced at one another we looked
all of us at our host--looked somewhat guiltily. He was deep in
thought, his eyes on the stove; but he seemed to feel our gaze upon
him, and he looked up abruptly. "Master Van Tree----" he said, and
stopped.

"You know him well?" the Duchess said, appealing to him softly. We
felt a kind of sorrow for him, and some delicacy, too, about accusing
one of his countrymen of a thing so cowardly. "Do you think it is
possible," she continued with an effort--"possible that he can have
done this, Master Lindstrom?"

"I have known him from a boy," the merchant said, looking up, a hand
on either knee, and speaking with a simplicity almost majestic, "and
never knew him do a mean thing, madam. I know no more than that." And
he looked round on us.

"That is a good deal; still, he went off in a fit of jealousy when
Master Carey brought Dymphna home. We must remember that."

"Yes, I would he knew the rights of that matter," said the Dutchman
heartily.

"And he has been hanging about the place all day," my lady persisted.

"Yes," Master Lindstrom rejoined patiently; "yet I do not think he did
this."

"Then who did?" she said, somewhat nettled.

That was the question. I had my opinion, as I saw Master Bertie and
the Duchess had. I did not doubt it was Van Tree. Yet a thought struck
me. "It might be well," I suggested, "that some one should ask
Mistress Anne whether the door was open when she left the room. She
passed out just in front of me."

"But she does not go by the door," my lady objected.

"No, she would turn at once and go upstairs," I agreed. "But she could
see the door from the foot of the stairs--if she looked that way, I
mean."

The Duchess assented, and went out of the room to put the question. We
three, left together, sat staring at the dull flame of the lamp, and
were for the most part silent, Master Bertie only remarking that it
was after midnight. The suspicion he and I entertained of Van Tree's
guilt seemed to raise a barrier between us and our host. My wound,
slight as it was, smarted and burned, and my head ached. After
midnight, was it? What a day it had been!

When the Duchess came back, as she did in a few minutes, both Anne and
Dymphna came with her. The girls had risen hastily, and were shivering
with cold and alarm. Their eyes were bright, their manner was excited.
They were full of sympathy and horror and wonder, as was natural; of
nervous fear for themselves, too. But my lady cut short their
exclamations. "Anne says she did not notice the door," she said.

"No," the girl answered, trembling visibly as she spoke. "I went up
straight to bed. But who could it be? Did you see nothing of him as he
struck you? Not a feature? Not an outline?"

"No," I murmured.

"Did he not say a word?" she continued, with strange insistence. "Was
he tall or short?" Her dark eyes dwelling on mine seemed to probe my
thoughts, as though they challenged me to keep anything back from her.
"Was it the man you hurt this morning?" she suggested.

"No," I answered reluctantly. "This man was short."

"Short, was he? Was it Master Van Tree, then?"

We, who felt also certain that it was Van Tree, started, nevertheless,
at hearing the charge put into words before Dymphna. I wondered, and I
think the others did, too, at Mistress Anne's harshness. Even my lady,
so blunt and outspoken by nature, had shrunk from trying to question
the Dutch girl about her lover. We looked at Dymphna, wondering how
she would take it.

We had forgotten that she could not understand English. But this did
not serve her; for without a pause Mistress Anne turned to her, and
unfalteringly said something in her scanty Dutch which came to the
same thing. A word or two of questioning and explanation followed.
Then the meaning of the accusation dawned at last on Dymphna's mind. I
looked for an outburst of tears or protestations. Instead, with a
glance of wonder and great scorn, with a single indignant widening of
her beautiful eyes, she replied by a curt Dutch sentence.

"What does she say?" my lady exclaimed eagerly.

"She says," replied Master Lindstrom, who was looking on gravely,
"that it is a base lie, madam."

On that we became spectators. It seemed to me, and I think to all of
us, that the two girls stood apart from us in a circle of light by
themselves; confronting one another with sharp glances as though a
curtain had been raised from between them, and they saw one another in
their true colors and recognized some natural antagonism, or, it might
be, some rivalry each in the other. I think I was not peculiar in
feeling this, for we all kept silence for a space as though expecting
something to follow. In the middle of this silence there came a low
rapping at the door.

One uttered a faint shriek; another stood as if turned to stone. The
Duchess cried for her child. The rest of us looked at one another.
Midnight was past. Who could be abroad, who could want us at this
hour? As a rule we should have been in bed and asleep long ago. We had
no neighbors save the cotters on the far side of the island. We knew
of no one likely to arrive at this time with any good intent.

"I will open," said Master Lindstrom. But he looked doubtfully at the
women-folk as he said it.

"One minute," whispered the Duchess. "That table is solid and heavy.
Could you not----"

"Put it across the door?" concluded her husband. "Yes, we will." And
it was done at once, the two men--my lady would not let me help--so
arranging it that it prevented the door being opened to its full
width.

"That will stop a rush," said Master Bertie with satisfaction.

It did strengthen the position, yet it was a nervous moment when our
host prepared to lower the bar. "Who is there?" he cried loudly.

We waited, listening and looking at one another, the fear of arrest
and the horrors of the Inquisition looming large in the minds of some
of us at least. The answer, when it came, did not reassure us. It was
uttered in a voice so low and muffled that we gained no information,
and rather augured treachery the more. I remember noticing how each
took the crisis; how Mistress Anne's face was set hard, and her breath
came in jerks; how Dymphna, pale and trembling, seemed yet to have
eyes only for her father; how the Duchess faced the entrance like a
queen at bay. All this I took in at a glance. Then my gaze returned to
Master Lindstrom, as he dropped the bar with a jerk. The door was
pushed open at once as far as it would go. A draught of cold air came
in, and with it Van Tree. He shut the door behind him.


Never were six people so taken aback as we were. But the newcomer,
whose face was flushed with haste and excitement, observed nothing.
Apparently he saw nothing unexpected even in our presence downstairs
at that hour, nothing hostile or questioning in the half circle of
astonished faces turned toward him. On the contrary, he seemed
pleased. "Ah!" he exclaimed gutturally. "It is well! You are up! You
have taken the alarm!"

It was to me he spoke, and I was so surprised by that, and by his
sudden appearance, so dumfounded by his easy address and the absence
of all self-consciousness on his part, so struck by a change in him,
that I stared in silence. I could not believe that this was the same
half-shy, half-fierce young man who had flung away a few hours before
in a passion of jealousy. My theory that he was the assassin seemed on
a sudden extravagant, though here he was on the spot. When Master
Lindstrom asked, "Alarm! What alarm?" I listened for his answer as I
should have listened for the answer of a friend and ally, without
hesitation, without distrust. For in truth the man was transfigured;
changed by the rise of something to the surface which ordinarily lay
hid in him. Before, he had seemed churlish, awkward, a boor. But in
this hour of our need and of his opportunity he showed himself as he
was. Action and purpose lifted him above his outward seeming. I caught
the generous sparkle in his eye, and trusted him.

"What!" he said, keeping his voice low. "You do not know? They are
coming to arrest you. Their plan is to surround the house before
daybreak. Already there is a boat lying in the river watching the
landing-stage."

"Whom are they coming to arrest?" I asked. The others were silent,
looking at this strange messenger with mingled feelings.

"All, I fear," he replied. "You, too, Master Lindstrom. Some one has
traced your English friends hither and informed against you. I know
not on what ground you are included, but I fear the worst. There is
not a moment to be lost if you would escape by the bridge, before the
troop who are on the way to guard it arrives."

"The landing-stage, you say, is already watched?" our host asked, his
phlegmatic coolness showing at its best. His eyes roved round the
room, and he tugged, as was his habit when deep in thought, at his
beard. I felt sure that he was calculating which of his possessions he
could remove.

"Yes," Van Tree answered. "My father got wind of the plan in Arnheim.
An English envoy arrived there yesterday on his way to Cleves or some
part of Germany. It is rumored that he has come out of his road to
inquire after certain English fugitives whom his Government are
anxious to seize. But come, we have no time to lose! Let us go!"

"Do you come too?" Master Lindstrom said, pausing in the act of
turning away. He spoke in Dutch, but by some inspiration born of
sympathy I understood both his question and the answer.

"Yes, I come. Where Dymphna goes I go, and where she stops I stop,
though it be at Madrid itself," the young man answered gallantly. His
eyes kindled, and he seemed to grow taller and to gain majesty. The
barrier of race, which had hindered me from viewing him fairly before,
fell in a trice. I felt now only a kindly sorrow that he had done this
noble thing, and not I. I went to him and grasped his hand; and though
I said nothing, he seemed, after a single start of surprise, to
understand me fully. He understood me even better, if that were
possible, an hour later, when Dymphna had told him of her adventure
with the Spaniard, and he came to me to thank me.

Ordered myself to be idle, I found all busy round me, busy with a
stealthy diligence. Master Lindstrom was packing his plate. Dymphna,
pale, but with soft, happy eyes--for had she not cause to be
proud?--was preparing food and thick clothing. The Duchess had fetched
her child and was dressing it for the journey. Master Bertie was
collecting small matters, and looking to our arms. In one or other of
these occupations--I can guess in which--Van Tree was giving his aid.
And so, since the Duchess would not let me do anything, it chanced
that presently I found myself left alone for a few minutes with Anne.

I was not watching her. I was gnawing my nails in a fit of
despondency, reflecting that I was nothing but a hindrance and a
drawback to my friends, since whenever a move had to be made I was
sure to be invalided, when I became aware, through some mysterious
sense, that my companion, who was kneeling on the floor behind me,
packing, had desisted from her work and was gazing fixedly at me. I
turned. Yes, she was looking at me; her eyes, in which a smoldering
fire seemed to burn, contrasting vividly with her pale face and
contracted brows. When she saw that I had turned--of which at first
she did not seem aware--she rose and came to me, and laid a hand on my
shoulder and leaned over me. A feeling that was very like fright fell
upon me, her manner was so strange. "What is it?" I stammered, as she
still pored on me in silence, still maintained her attitude. "What is
the matter, Anne?"

"Are you _quite_ a fool?" she whispered, her voice almost a hiss, her
hot breath on my cheek. "Have you no sense left, that you trust that
man?"

For a moment I failed to understand her. "What man?" I said. "Oh, Van
Tree!"

"Ay, Van Tree! Who else? Will you go straight into the trap he has
laid for you?" She moistened her lips with her tongue, as though they
were parched. "You are all mad! Mad, I think! Don't you see," she
continued, stooping over me again and whispering hurriedly, her wild
eyes close to mine, "that he is jealous of you?"

"He was," I said uneasily. "That is all right now."

"He was? He is!" she retorted. "He went away wild with you. He comes
back smiling and holding out his hand. Do you trust him? Don't you
see--don't you see," she cried, rocking me to and fro with her hand in
her excitement, "that he is fooling you? He is leading us all into a
trap that has been laid carefully enough. What is this tale of an
English envoy on his way to Germany? Rubbish! Rubbish, I tell you."

"But Clarence----"

"Bah! It was all your fancy!" she cried fiercely, her eyes for the
moment flitting to the door, then returning to my face. "How should he
find us here? Or what has Clarence to do with an English envoy?"

"I do not know," I said. She had not in the least persuaded me. In a
rare moment I had seen into Van Tree's soul and trusted him
implicitly. "Please take care," I added, wincing under her hand. "You
hurt me!"

She sprang back with a sudden change of countenance as if I had struck
her, and for a moment cowered away from me, her former passion still
apparent fighting for the mastery in her face. I set down her
condition to terror at the plight we were all in, or to vexation that
no one would take her view. The next moment I went farther. I thought
her mad, when she turned abruptly from me and, flying to the door by
which Van Tree had entered, began with trembling fingers to release
the pin which confined the bar.

"Stop! stop! you will ruin all!" I cried in horror. "They can see that
door from the river, and if they see the light, they will know we are
up and have taken the alarm; and they may make a dash to secure us.
Stop, Anne! Stop!" I cried. But the girl was deaf. She tugged
desperately at the pin, and had already loosened the bar when I caught
her by the arms, and, pushing her away, set my back against the door.
"Don't be foolish!" I said gently. "You have lost your head. You must
let us men settle these things, Anne."

She was indeed beside herself, for she faced me during a second or two
as though she would spring upon me and tear me from the door. Her
hands worked, her eyes gleamed, her strong white teeth showed
themselves. I shuddered. I had never pictured her looking like that.
Then, as steps sounded on the stairs and cheerful voices--cheerful
they seemed to me as they broke in on that strange scene--drew nearer,
she turned, and walking deliberately to a seat, fell to weeping
hysterically.

"What are you doing to that door?" cried the Duchess sharply, as she
entered with the others. I was securing the bar again.

"Nothing," I said stolidly. "I am seeing that it is fast."

"And hoity toity, miss!" she continued, turning to Anne. "What has
come over you, I would like to know? Stop crying, girl; what is the
matter with you? Will you shame us all before this Dutch maid? Here,
carry these things to the back door."

Anne somehow stifled her sobs and rose. Seeming by a great effort to
recover composure, she went out, keeping her face to the last averted
from me.

We all followed, variously laden, Master Lindstrom and Van Tree, who
carried between them the plate-chest, being the last to leave. There
was not one of us--even of us who had only known the house a few
weeks--who did not heave a sigh as we passed out of the warm lamp-lit
parlor, which, littered as it was with the debris of packing, looked
still pleasant and comfortable in comparison with the darkness outside
and the uncertain future before us. What, then, must have been the
pain of parting to those who had never known any other home? Yet they
took it bravely. To Dymphna, Van Tree's return had brought great
happiness. To Master Lindstrom, any ending to a long series of
anxieties and humiliations was welcome. To Van Tree--well, he had
Dymphna with him, and his side of the plate-chest was heavy, and gave
him ample employment.


We passed out silently through the back door, leaving the young
Dutchman to lock it behind us, and flitted, a line of gliding shadows,
through the orchard. It was two o'clock, the sky was overcast, a
slight drizzle was falling. Once an alarm was given that we were being
followed; and we huddled together, and stood breathless, a clump of
dark figures gazing affrightedly at the tree trunks which surrounded
us, and which seemed--at least to the women's eyes--to be moving, and
to be men closing in on us. But the alarm was groundless, and with no
greater mishap than a few stumbles when we came to the slippery edge
of the creek, we reached the boat, and one by one, admirably ordered
by our host, got in and took our seats. Van Tree and Master Lindstrom
pushed us off; then they swung themselves in and paddled warily along,
close under the bank, where the shadows of the poplars fell across us,
and our figures blended darkly with the line of rushes on the shore.




                             CHAPTER XII.

                           ANNE'S PETITION.


We coasted along in this silent fashion, nearly as far as the hamlet
and bridge, following, but farther inshore, the course which Master
Lindstrom and I had taken when on our way to bury the Spaniard. A
certain point gained, at a signal from our host we struck out into the
open, and rowed swiftly toward the edge of the marsh. This was the
critical moment; but, so far as we could learn, our passage was
unnoticed. We reached the fringe of rushes; with a prolonged hissing
sound the boat pushed through them; a flight of water-fowl rose,
whirring and clapping about us, and we floated out into a dim misty
lake, whose shores and surface stretched away on every side, alike
dark, shifting, and uncertain.

Across this the Dutchman steered us, bringing us presently to a narrow
opening, through which we glided into a second and smaller mere. At
the farther end of this one the way seemed barred by a black,
impenetrable wall of rushes, which rose far above our heads. But the
tall stems bent slowly with many a whispered protest before our silent
onset, and we slid into a deep water-lane, here narrow, there widening
into a pool, in one place dark, in another reflecting the gray night
sky. Down this we sped swiftly, the sullen plash of the oars and the
walls of rushes always with us. For ourselves, we crouched still and
silent, shivering and listening for sounds of pursuit; now starting at
the splash of a frog, again shuddering at the cry of a night-bird. The
Duchess, her child, and I were in the bows, Master Lindstrom, his
daughter, and Mistress Anne in the stern. They had made me comfortable
with the baggage and some warm coverings, and would insist on treating
me as helpless. Even when the others began to talk in whispers, the
Duchess enjoined silence on me, and bade me sleep. Presently I did so,
my last impression one of unending water-ways and shoreless, shadowy
lakes.

When I awoke the sun was high and the scene was changed indeed. We lay
on the bosom of a broad river, our boat seeming now to stand still as
the sail flapped idly, now to heel over and shoot forward as the light
breeze struck us. The shores abreast of us were still low and reedy,
but ahead the slopes of green wooded hills rose gently from the
stream. Master Bertie was steering, and, seeing me lift my head,
greeted me with a smile. The girls in the stern were covered up and
asleep. Amidships, too, Master Lindstrom and Van Tree had curled
themselves up between the thwarts, and were slumbering peacefully. I
turned to look for the Duchess, and found her sitting wide awake at my
elbow, her eyes on her husband.

"Well," she said smiling, "do you feel better now? You have had a good
sleep."

"How long have I been asleep, please?" I asked, bewildered by the
sunshine, by the shining river and the green hills, by the fresh
morning air, by the change in everything; and answering in a question,
as people freshly aroused do nine times out of ten. "Where are we?"

"You have been asleep nearly six hours, and we are on the Rhine, near
Emmerich," she answered, smiling. She was pale, and the long hours of
watching had drawn dark circles round her eyes. But the old undaunted
courage shone in them still, and her smile was as sweet as ever.

"Have we passed the frontier?" I asked eagerly.

"Well, nearly," she answered. "But how does your wound feel?"

"Rather stiff and sore," I said ruefully, after making an experiment
by moving my body to and fro. "And I am very thirsty, but I could
steer."

"So you shall," she said. "Only first eat something. We broke our fast
before the others lay down. There is bread and meat behind you, and
some hollands and water in the bottle."

I seized the latter and drank greedily. Then, finding myself hungry
now I came to think about it, I fell upon the eatables.

"You will do now, I think," she said, when she had watched me for some
time.

I laughed for answer, pleased that the long dark night, its gloom and
treachery were past. But its memories remained and presently I said,
"If Van Tree did not try to kill me--and I am perfectly sure he did
not----"

"So am I," she said. "We were all wrong."

"Then," I continued, looking at her gravely, "who did? that is the
question. And why?"

"You are sure that it was not the Spaniard whom you hurt in defense of
Dymphna?" my lady asked.

"Quite sure."

"And sure that it was not Clarence?" she persisted.

"Quite sure. It was a short man," I explained again, "and dressed in a
cloak. That is all I can tell about him."

"It might be some one employed by Clarence," she suggested, her face
gloomy, her brows knit.

"True, I had not thought of that," I answered. "And it reminds me. I
have heard so much of Clarence----"

"And seen some little--even that little more than was good for you."

"Yes, he has had the better of me, on both occasions," I allowed. "But
I was going to ask you," I continued, "to tell me something about him.
He was your steward, I know. But how did he come to you? How was it
you trusted him?"

"We are all fools at times," she answered grimly. "We wanted to have
persons of our own faith about us, and he was highly commended to us
by Protestants abroad, as having seen service in the cause. He applied
to us just at the right moment, too. And at the first we felt a great
liking for him. He was so clever in arranging things, he kept such
excellent order among the servants; he was so ready, so willing, so
plausible! Oh!" she added bitterly, "he had ways that enabled him to
twist nine women out of ten round his fingers! Richard was fond of
him; I liked him; we had talked more than once of how we might advance
his interests. And then, like a thunderbolt on a clear day, the
knowledge of his double-dealing fell upon us. We learned that he had
been seen talking with a known agent of Gardiner, and this at a time
when the Bishop was planning our ruin. We had him watched, and just
when the net had all but closed round us we discovered that he had
been throughout in Gardiner's pay."

"Ah!" I said viciously. "The oddest thing to me is the way he has
twice escaped me when I had him at the sword's point!"

"The third time may bring other fortune, Master Francis," she answered
smiling. "Yet be wary with him. He is a good swordsman, as my husband,
who sometimes fenced with him, will tell you."

"He can be no common man," I said.

"He is not. He is well-bred, and has seen service. He is at once bold
and cunning. He has a tongue would win most women, and a hardihood
that would chain them to him. Women love bold men," my lady added
navely. And she smiled on me--yet humorously--so that I blushed.

There was silence for a moment. The sail flapped, then filled again.
How delicious this morning after that night, this bright expanse after
the dark, sluggish channels! Far away in front a great barge,
high-laden with a mighty stack of rushes, crept along beside the bank,
the horse that drew it covered by a kind of knitted rug. When my lady
spoke next, it was abruptly. "Is it Anne?" she asked.

I knew quite well what she meant, and blushed again. I shook my head.

"I think it was going to be," she said sagely, "only Mistress Dymphna
came upon the scene. You have heard the story of the donkey halting
between two bundles of hay, Master Francis? And in the multitude of
sweethearts there is safety."

"I do not think that was my case," I said. Instinctively my hand went
to my breast, in which Petronilla's velvet sword-knot lay safe and
warm. The Duchess saw the gesture and instantly bent forward and
mimicked it. "Ha! ha!" she cried, leaning back with her hands clasped
about her knees, and her eyes shining with fun and amusement. "Now I
understand. You have left her at home; now, do not deny it, or I will
tell the others. Be frank and I will keep your secret, on my honor."

"She is my cousin," I said, my cheeks hot.

"And her name?"

"Petronilla."

"Petronilla?" my lady repeated shrewdly. "That was the name of your
Spanish grandmother, then?"

"Yes, madam."

"Petronilla? Petronilla?" she repeated, stroking her cheek with her
hand. "She would be before my time, would she not? Yet there used to
be several Petronillas about the court in Queen Catherine of Aragon's
days, I remember. There was Petronilla de Vargas for one. But there, I
guess at random. Why do you not tell me more about yourself, Master
Francis? Do you not know me well enough now?"

"There is nothing to tell, madam," I said in a low voice.

"Your family? You come, I am sure, of a good house."

"I did, but it is nothing to me now. I am cut off from it. I am
building my house afresh. And," I added bitterly, "I have not made
much way with it yet."

She broke, greatly to my surprise, into a long peal of laughter. "Oh,
you vain boy!" she cried. "You valiant castle-builder! How long have
you been about the work? Three months? Do you think a house is to be
built in a day? Three months, indeed? Quite a lifetime!"

Was it three months? It seemed to me to be fully three years. I seemed
to have grown more than three years older since that February morning
when I had crossed Arden Forest with the first light, and looked down
on Wootton Wawen sleeping in its vale, and roused the herons fishing
in the bottoms.

"Come, tell me all about it!" she said abruptly. "What did you do to
be cut off?"

"I cannot tell you," I answered.

A shade of annoyance clouded her countenance. But it passed away
almost on the instant. "Very well," she said, with a little nod of
disdain and a pretty grimace. "So be it. Have your own way. But I
prophesy you will come to me with your tale some day."

I went then and took Master Bertie's place at the tiller; and, he
lying down, I had the boat to myself until noon, and drew no little
pleasure from the placid picture which the moving banks and the wide
river presented. About noon there was a general uprising; and, coming
immediately afterward to a little island lying close to one bank, we
all landed to stretch our legs and refresh ourselves after the
confinement on board.


"We are over the border now and close to Emmerich," said Master
Lindstrom, "though the mere line of frontier will avail us little if
the Spanish soldiers can by hook or crook lay hands on us! Therefore,
we must lose no time in getting within the walls of some town. We
should be fairly secure for a few days either in Wesel or Santon."

"I thought Wesel was the point we were making for," Master Bertie said
in some surprise.

"It was Wesel I mentioned the other day," the Dutchman admitted
frankly. "And it is the bigger town and the stronger. But I have more
friends in Santon. To Wesel the road from Emmerich runs along the
right bank. To Santon we go by a cross-country road, starting from the
left bank opposite Emmerich, a road longer and more tedious. But we
are much less likely to be followed that way than along the Wesel
road, and on second thoughts I incline to Santon."

"But why adopt either road? Why not go on by river?" I asked.

"Because we should be overtaken. The wind is falling, and the boat,"
our late host explained, more truly than politely, "with the women in
it is heavy."

"I understand," I said. "And you feel sure we shall be pursued?"

For answer he pointed with a smile to his plate-chest. "Quite sure,"
he added. "With that before them they will think nothing of the
frontier. I fancy that for you, if the English Government be in
earnest, there will be no absolutely safe place short of the free city
of Frankfort. Unless indeed you have interest with the Duke of
Cleves."

"Ah!" said the Duchess. And she looked at her husband.

"Ah!" said Master Bertie, and he looked very blankly at his wife. So
that I did not derive much comfort from that suggestion.

"Then it is Santon, is it?" said my lady.

"That first, at any rate. Then, if they follow us along the Wesel
road, we shall still give them the slip."

So it was settled, neither Van Tree nor the girls having taken any
part in the discussion. The former and Dymphna were talking aside, and
Mistress Anne was sitting low down on the bank, with her feet almost
in the water, immersed to all appearance in her own thoughts. There
was a little bustle as we rose to get into the boat, which we had
drawn up on the landward side of the island so as to be invisible from
the main channel; and in the middle of this I was standing with one
foot in the boat and one on shore, taking from Anne various articles
which we had landed for rearrangement, when she whispered to me that
she wanted to speak to me alone.

"I want to tell you something," she said, raising her eyes to my face,
and then averting them. "Follow me this way."

She strolled, as if accidentally, twenty or thirty paces along the
bank; and in a minute I joined her. I found her gazing down the river
in the direction from which we had come. "What is it?" I said
anxiously. "You do not see anything, do you?" For there had been a
hint of bad news in her voice.

She dropped the hand with which she had been shading her eyes and
turned to me. "Master Francis, you will not think me very foolish?"
she said. Then I perceived that her lip was quivering and that there
were tears in her eyes. They were very beautiful eyes when, as now,
they grew soft, and appeal took the place of challenge.

"What is it?" I replied, speaking cheerfully to reassure her. She had
scarcely got over her terror of last night. She trembled as she stood.

"It is about Santon," she answered with a miserable little catch in
her voice. "I am so afraid of going there! Master Lindstrom says it is
a rough, long road, and when we are there we are not a bit farther
from those wretches than at Wesel, and--and----"

"There, there!" I said. She was on the point of bursting into tears,
and was clearly much overwrought. "You are making the worst of it. If
it were not for Master Lindstrom I should be inclined to choose Wesel
myself. But he ought to know best."

"But that is not all," she said, clasping her hands and looking up at
me with her face grown full of solemn awe; "I have had a dream."

"Well, but dreams----" I objected.

"You do not believe in dreams?" she said, dropping her head
sorrowfully.

"No, no; I do not say that," I admitted, naturally startled. "But what
was your dream?"

"I thought we took the road to Santon. And mind," she added earnestly,
"this was before Master Lindstrom had uttered a word about going that
way, or any other way save to Wesel. I dreamt that we followed the
road through such a dreadful flat country, a country all woods and
desolate moorland, under a gray sky, and in torrents of rain, to----"

"Well, well?" I said, with a passing shiver at the picture. She
described it with a rapt, absent air, which made me creep--as if even
now she were seeing something uncanny.

"And then I thought that in the middle of these woods, about half-way
to Santon, they overtook us, and there was a great fight."

"There would be sure to be that!" I muttered, with shut teeth.

"And I thought you were killed, and we women were dragged back! There,
I cannot tell you the rest!" she added wildly. "But try, try to get
them to go the old way. If not, I know evil will come of it. Promise
me to try?"

"I will tell them your dream," I said.

"No, no!" she exclaimed still more vehemently. "They would only laugh.
Madam does not believe in dreams. But they will listen to you if you
say you think the other way better. Promise me you will! Promise me!"
she pleaded, her hands clasping my arm, and her tearful eyes looking
up to mine.

"Well," I agreed reluctantly, "I will try. After all, the shortest way
may be the best. But if I do," I said kindly, "you must promise me in
return not to be alarmed any longer, Anne."

"I will try," she said gratefully; "I will indeed, Francis."


We were summoned at that minute, for the boat was waiting for us. The
Duchess scanned us rather curiously as we ran up--we were the last.
But Anne kept her word, and concealed her fears so bravely that, as
she jumped in from the bank, her air of gayety almost deceived me, and
would have misled the sharpest-sighted person who had not been present
at our interview, so admirably was it assumed.

We calculated that our pursuers would not follow us down the river for
some hours. They would first have to search the island, and the watch
which they had set on the landing-stage would lead them to suspect
rather that we had fled by land. We hoped, therefore, to reach
Emmerich unmolested. There Master Lindstrom said we could get horses,
and he thought we might be safe in Santon by the following evening.

"If you really think we had better go to Santon," I said. This was an
hour or two after leaving the island, and when we looked to sight
Emmerich very soon, the hills which we had seen in front all day, and
which were grateful to eyes sated with the monotony of Holland, being
now pretty close to us.

"I thought that we had settled that," replied the Dutchman promptly.

I felt they were all looking at me. "I look at it this way," I said,
reddening. "Wesel is not far from Emmerich by the road. Should we not
have an excellent chance of reaching it before our pursuers come up?"

"You might reach it," Master Lindstrom said gravely. "Though, again,
you might not."

"And, Wesel once reached," I persisted, "there is less fear of
violence being attempted there than in Santon. It is a larger town."

"True," he admitted. "But it is just this. Will you be able to reach
Wesel? It is the getting there--that is the difficulty; the getting
there before you are caught."

"If we have a good start, why should we not?" I urged; and urged it
the more persistently, the more I found them opposed to it. Naturally
there ensued a warm discussion. At first they all sided against me,
save of course Anne, and she sat silent, though she was visibly
agitated, as from minute to minute I or they seemed likely to prevail.
But presently when I grew warmer, and urged again and again the
strength of Wesel, my own party veered round, yet still with doubt and
misgiving. The Dutchman shrugged his shoulders to the end and remained
unpersuaded. But finally it was decided that I should have my own way.
We would go to Wesel.


Every one knows how a man feels when he comes victorious out of such a
battle. He begins on the instant to regret his victory, and to see the
possible evils which may result from it; to repent the hot words he
has used in the strife and the declarations he has flung broadcast.
That dreadful phrase, "I told you so!" rises like an avenging fury
before his fancy, and he quails.

I felt all this the moment the thing was settled. But I was too young
to back out and withdraw my words. I hoped for the best, and resolved
inwardly to get the party mounted the moment we reached Emmerich.

I soon had the opportunity of proving this resolution to be more
easily made than carried out. About three o'clock we reached the
little town dominated, as we saw from afar, by an ancient minster,
and, preferring not to enter it, landed at the steps of an inn a
quarter of a mile short of the gates, and marking a point where we
might take the road to Wesel, or, crossing the river, the road to
Santon. Master Lindstrom seemed well known, but there were
difficulties about the horses. The German landlord listened to his
story with apparent sympathy--but no horses! We could not understand
the tongue in which the two talked, but the Dutchman's questions,
quick and animated for once, and the landlord's slow replies, reminded
me of the foggy morning when in a similar plight we had urged the
master of the _Lion's Whelp_ to put to sea. And I feared a similar
result.

"He says he cannot get so many horses to-night," said Master Lindstrom
with a long face.

"Offer him more money!" quoth the Duchess.

"If we cannot have horses until the morning, we may as well go on in
the boat," I urged.

"He says, too, that the water is out on the road," continued the
Dutchman.

"Nonsense! Double the price!" cried my lady impatiently.

I suppose that this turned the scale. The landlord finally promised
that in an hour four saddle-horses for Master Bertie and the Duchess,
Anne and myself, should be ready, with a couple of pack-horses and a
guide. Master Lindstrom, his daughter, and Van Tree would start a
little later for Cleves, five miles on the road to Santon, if
conveyance could be got. "And if not," our late host added, as we said
something about our unwillingness to leave him in danger, "I shall be
safe enough in the town, but I hope to sleep in Cleves."

It was all settled very hastily. We felt--and I in particular, since
my plan had been adopted--an unreasonable impatience to be off. As we
stood on the bank by the inn-door, we had a straight reach of river a
mile long in full view below us; and now we were no longer moving
ourselves, but standing still, expected each minute to see the Spanish
boat, with its crew of desperadoes, sweep round the corner before our
eyes. Master Lindstrom assured us that if we were once out of sight
our pursuers would get no information as to the road we had taken,
either from the inn-keeper or his neighbors. "There is no love lost
between them and the Spaniards," he said shrewdly. "And I know the
people here, and they know me. The burghers may not be very keen to
come to blows with the Spaniards or to resent their foray. But the
latter, on their part, will be careful not to go too far or to make
themselves obnoxious."


We took the opportunity of supping then, not knowing when we might get
food again. I happened to finish first, and, hearing the horses'
hoofs, went out and watched the lads who were to be our guides
fastening the baggage on the sumpter beasts. I gave them a hand--not
without a wince or two, for the wound in my chest was painful--and
while doing so had a flash of remembrance. I went to the unglazed
window of the kitchen in which the others sat, and leaned my elbows on
the sill. "I say!" I said, full of my discovery, "there is something
we have forgotten!"

"What?" asked the Duchess, rising and coming toward me, while the
others paused in their meal to listen.

"The letter to Mistress Clarence," I answered. "I was going to get it
when I was stabbed, you remember, and afterward we forgot all about
it. Now it is too late. It has been left behind."

She did not answer then, but came out to me, and turned with me to
look at the horses. "This comes of your foolish scruples, Master
Francis!" she said severely. "Where was it?"

"I slipped it between the leathers of the old haversack you gave me,"
I answered, "which I used to have for a pillow. Van Tree brought my
things down, but overlooked the haversack, I suppose. At any rate, it
is not here."

"Well, it is no good crying over spilt milk," she said.

She called the others out then, and there was no mistaking Mistress
Anne's pleasure at escaping the Santon road. She was radiant, and
vouchsafed me a very pretty glance of thanks, in which her relief as
well as her gratitude shone clearly. By half-past four we had got,
wearied as we were, to horse, and with three hours of daylight before
us hoped to reach Wesel without mishap. But for most of us the start
was saddened by the parting--though we hoped it would be only for a
time--from our Dutch friends. We remembered how good and stanch they
had been to us. We feared--though Master Lindstrom would not hear of
it--that we had brought misfortune upon them, and neither the
Duchess's brave eyes nor Dymphna's blue ones were free from tears as
they embraced. I wrung Van Tree's hand as if I had known him for
months instead of days, for a common danger is a wondrous knitter of
hearts; and he only smiled--though Dymphna blushed--when I kissed her
cheek. A few broken words, a last cry of farewell, and we four, with
our two guides behind us, moved down the Wesel road, the last I heard
of our good friends being Master Lindstrom's charge, shouted after us,
"to beware of the water if it was out!"




                            CHAPTER XIII.

                         A WILLFUL MAN'S WAY.


Only to feel that we were moving was a relief, though our march was
very slow. Master Bertie carried the child slung in a cloak before
him, and, thus burdened, could not well go beyond a smooth amble,
while the guides, who were on foot, and the pack-horses, found this
pace as much as they could manage. A little while and the exhilaration
of the start died away. The fine morning was followed by a wet
evening, and before we had left Emmerich three miles behind us Master
Bertie and I had come to look at one another meaningly. We were moving
in a dreary, silent procession through heavy rain, with the prospect
of the night closing in early. The road, too, grew more heavy with
each furlong, and presently began to be covered with pools of water.
We tried to avoid this inconvenience by resorting to the hill slopes
on our left, but found the attempt a waste of time, as a deep stream
or backwater, bordered by marshes, intervened. The narrow road, raised
but little above the level of the swiftly flowing river on our right,
turned out to be our only possible path; and when Master Bertie
discerned this his face grew more and more grave.

We soon found, indeed, as we plodded along, that a sheet of water,
which palely reflected the evening light, was taking the place of the
road; and through this we had to plash and plash at a snail's pace,
one of the guides on a pack-horse leading the way, and Master Bertie
in charge of his wife coming next; then, at some distance, for her
horse did not take kindly to the water, the younger woman followed in
my care. The other guide brought up the rear. In this way, stopped
constantly by the fears of the horses, which were scared by the
expanse of flood before them, we crept wearily on until the moon rose.
It brought, alas, an access of light, but no comfort! The water seemed
continually to grow deeper, the current on our right swifter; and each
moment I dreaded the announcement that farther advance was impossible.

It seemed to have come to that at last, for I saw the Duchess and her
husband stop and stand waiting for me, their dark shadows projected
far over the moonlit surface.

"What is to be done?" Master Bertie called out, as we moved up to
them. "The guide tells me that there is a broken piece of road in
front which will be impassable with this depth of water."

I had expected to hear this; yet I was so dumfoundered--for, this
being true, we were lost indeed--that for a time I could not answer.
No one had uttered a word of reproach, but I knew what they must be
thinking. I had brought them to this. It was my foolish insistence had
done it. The poor beast under me shivered. I struck him with my heels.
"We must go forward!" I said desperately. "Or what? What do you think?
Go back?"

"Steady! steady, Master Knight Errant!" the Duchess cried in her calm,
brave voice. "I never knew you so bad a counselor before!"

"It is my fault that you are here," I said, looking dismally around.

"Perhaps the other road is as bad," Master Bertie replied. "At any
rate, that is past and gone. The question is, what are we to do now?
To remain here is to die of cold and misery. To go back may be to run
into the enemy's arms. To go forward----"

"Will be to be drowned!" Mistress Anne cried with a pitiful sob.

I could not blame her. A more gloomy outlook than ours, as we sat on
our jaded horses in the middle of this waste of waters, which appeared
in the moonlight to be boundless, could scarcely be imagined. The
night was cold for the time of year, and the keen wind pierced our
garments and benumbed our limbs. At any moment the rain might begin
afresh, and the moon be overcast. Of ourselves, we could not take a
step without danger, and our guides had manifestly lost their heads
and longed only to return.

"Yet, I am for going forward," the Duchess urged. "If there be but
this one bad place we may pass it with care."

"We may," her husband assented dubiously. "But suppose when we have
passed it we can go no farther. Suppose the----"

"It is no good supposing!" she retorted with some sharpness. "Let us
cross this place first, Richard, and we will deal with the other when
we come to it."

He nodded assent, and we moved slowly forward, compelling the guides
to go first. In this order we waded some hundred yards through water,
which grew deeper with each step, until it rose nearly to our girths.
Then the lads stopped.

"Are we over?" said the Duchess eagerly.

For answer one of them pointed to the flood before him, and peering
forward I made out a current sweeping silently and swiftly across our
path--a current with an ominous rush and swirl.

"Over?" grunted Master Bertie. "No, this is the place. See, the road
has given way, and the stream is pouring through from the river. I
expect it is getting worse every minute as the banks crumble."

We all craned forward, looking at it. It was impossible to say how
deep the water was, or how far the deep part might extend. And we had
with us a child and two women.

"We must go back!" said Master Bertie resolutely. "There is no doubt
about it. The flood is rising. If we do not take care, we shall be cut
off, and be able to go neither backward nor forward. I cannot see a
foot of dry land, as it is, before or behind us."

He was right. Far and wide, wherever our eyes could reach, the
moonlight was reflected in a sheet of water. We were nearly up to our
girths in water. On one side was the hurrying river, on the other were
the treacherous depths of the backwater. I asked the guide as well as
I could whether the road was good beyond. He answered that he did not
know. He and his companion were so terrified that we only kept them
beside us by threats.

"I fear we must go back," I said, assenting sorrowfully.

Even the Duchess agreed, and we were in the act of turning to
retrace our steps with what spirit we might, when a distant sound
brought us all to a standstill again. The wind was blowing from the
quarter whence we had come--from Emmerich; and it brought to us the
sound of voices. We all stopped to listen. Yes, they were voices we
heard--loud, strident tones, mingled now with the sullen plash of
horses tramping through the water. I looked at the Duchess. Her face
was pale, but her courage did not fail her. She understood in a trice
that the danger we had so much dreaded was upon us--that we were
followed, and the followers were at our heels; and she turned her
horse round again. Without a word she spurred it back toward the deep
part. I seized Anne's rein and followed, notwithstanding that the poor
girl in her terror would have resisted. Letting the guides go as they
pleased, we four in a moment found ourselves abreast again, our horses
craning over the stream, while we, with whip and spur, urged them on.

In cold blood we should scarcely have done it. Indeed, for a minute,
as our steeds stumbled, and recovered themselves, and slid forward,
only to draw back trembling--as the water rose above our boots or was
flung by our fellows in our eyes, and all was flogging and scrambling
and splashing, it seemed as if we were to be caught in a trap despite
our resolve. But at last Master Bertie's horse took the plunge. His
wife's followed; and both, partly floundering and partly swimming, set
forward snorting the while in fear. To my joy I saw them emerge safely
not ten yards away, and, shaking themselves, stand comparatively high
out of the water.

"Come!" cried my lady imperatively, as she turned in her saddle with a
gesture of defiance. "Come! It is all right."

Come, indeed! I wanted nothing better, for I was beside myself with
passion. But, flog as I might, I could not get Anne's brute to take
the plunge. The girl herself could give me no aid; clinging to her
saddle, pale and half-fainting, she could only beg me to leave her,
crying out again and again in a terrified voice that she would be
drowned. With her cry there suddenly mingled another, the hail of our
pursuers as they sighted us. I could hear them drawing nearer, and I
grew desperate. Luckily they could not make any speed in water so
deep, and time was given me for one last furious effort. It succeeded.
My horse literally fell into the stream; it dragged Anne's after it.
How we kept our seats, how they their footing, I never understood;
but, somehow, splashing and stumbling and blinded by the water dashed
in our faces, we came out on the other side, where the Duchess and her
husband, too faithful to us to save themselves, had watched the
struggle in an agony of suspense. I did but fling the girl's rein to
Master Bertie; and then I wheeled my horse to the stream again. I had
made up my mind what I must do. "Go on," I cried, waving my hand with
a gesture of farewell. "Go on! I can keep them here for a while."

"Nonsense!" I heard the Duchess cry, her voice high and shrill. "It
is----"

"Go on!" I cried. "Go on! Do not lose a moment, or it will be
useless."

Master Bertie hesitated. But he too saw that this was the only chance.
The Spaniards were on the brink of the stream now, and must, if they
passed it, overtake us easily. He hesitated, I have said, for a
moment. Then he seized his wife's rein and drew her on, and I heard
the three horses go splashing away through the flood. I threw a
glance at them over my shoulder, bethinking me that I had not told
the Duchess my story, and that Sir Anthony and Petronilla would
never--but, pish! What was I thinking of? That was a thought for a
woman. I had only to harden my heart now, and set my teeth together.
My task was very simple indeed. I had just to keep these men--there
were four--here as long as I could, and if possible to stop Clarence's
pursuit altogether.

For I had made no mistake. The first man to come up was
Clarence--Clarence himself. He let fall a savage word as his horse
stopped suddenly with its fore feet spread out on the edge of the
stream, and his dark face grew darker as he saw the swirling eddies,
and me standing fronting him in the moonlight with my sword out. He
discerned at once, I think, the strength of my position. Where I stood
the water was scarcely over my horse's fetlocks. Where he stood it was
over his horse's knees. And between us it flowed nearly four feet
deep.

He held a hasty parley with his companions. And then he hailed me.
"Will you surrender?" he cried in English. "We will give you quarter."

"Surrender? To whom?" I said. "And why--why should I surrender? Are
you robbers and cutpurses?"

"Surrender in the name of the Emperor, you fool!" he answered sternly
and roughly.

"I know nothing about the Emperor!" I retorted. "What Emperor?"

"In the Queen's name, then!"

"The Duke of Cleves is queen here!" I cried. "And as the flood is
rising," I added scornfully, "I would advise you to go home again."

"You would advise, would you? Who _are_ you?" he replied, in a kind of
wrathful curiosity.

I gave him no answer. I have often since reflected, with a fuller
knowledge of certain facts, that no stranger interview ever took place
than this short colloquy between us, that no stranger fight ever was
fought than that which we contemplated as we stood there bathed in the
May moonlight, with the water all round us, and the cold sky above. A
strange fight indeed it would have been between him and me, had it
ever come to the sword's point!

But this was what happened. His last words had scarcely rung out when
my horse began to quiver under me and sway backward and forward. I had
just time to take the alarm, when the poor beast sank down and rolled
gently over, leaving me bestriding its body, my feet in the water.
Whatever the cause of this, I had to disentangle myself, and that
quickly, for the four men opposite me, seeing me dismounted, plunged
with a cry of triumph into the water, and began to flounder across.
Without more ado I stepped forward to keep the ford.

The foremost and nearest to me was Clarence, whose horse began,
half-way across, to swim. It was still scrambling to regain its
footing when it came within my reach, and I slashed it cruelly across
the nostrils. It turned in an instant on its side. I saw the rider's
face gleam white in the water; his stirrup shone a moment as the horse
rolled over, then in a second the two were gone down the stream. It
was done so easily, so quickly, it amazed me. One gone! hurrah! I
turned quickly to the others, who were about landing. My blood was
fired, and my yell of victory, as I dashed at them, scared back two of
the horses. Despite their riders' urging, they turned and scrambled
out on the side from which they had entered. Only one was left, the
farthest from me. He got across indeed. Yet he was the most unlucky of
all, for his horse stumbled on landing, came down heavily on its head,
and flung him at my very feet.


[Illustration: I LUNGED TWICE AT THE RIDER]


It was no time for quarter--I had to think of my friends--and while
with one hand I seized the flying rein as the horse scrambled
trembling to its feet, with the other I lunged twice at the rider as
he half tried to rise, half tried to grasp at me. The second time I
ran him through, and he screamed shrilly. In those days I was young
and hotheaded, and I answered only by a shout of defiance, as I flung
myself into the saddle and dashed away through the water after my
friends.

_V[oe] victis!_ I had done enough to check the pursuit, and had yet
escaped myself. If I could join the others again, what a triumph it
would be! I had no guide, but neither had those in front of me; and
luckily at this point a row of pollard willows defined the line
between the road and the river. Keeping this on my right, I made good
way. The horse seemed strong under me, the water was shallow, and
appeared to be growing more so, and presently across the waste of
flood I discerned before me a dark, solitary tower, the tower
seemingly of a church, for it was topped by a stumpy spire, which
daylight would probably have shown to be of wood.

There was a little dry ground round the church, a mere patch in a sea
of water, but my horse rang its hoofs on it with every sign of joy,
and arched its neck as it trotted up to the neighborhood of the
church, whinnying with pleasure. From the back of the building, I was
not surprised, came an answering neigh. As I pulled up, a man, his
weapon in his hand, came from the porch, and a woman followed him. I
called to them gayly. "I fancied you would be here the moment I saw
the church!" I said, sliding to the ground.

"Thank Heaven you are safe!" the Duchess answered, and to my
astonishment she flung her arms round my neck and kissed me. "What has
happened?" she asked, looking in my eyes, her own full of tears.

"I think I have stopped them," I answered, turning suddenly shy,
though, boylike, I had been longing a few minutes before to talk of my
victory. "They tried to cross, and----"

I had not sheathed my sword. Master Bertie caught my wrist, and,
lifting the blade, looked at it. "So, so!" he said nodding. "Are you
hurt?"

"Not touched!" I answered. Before more was said he compelled his wife
to go back into the porch. The wind blew keenly across the open
ground, and we were all wet and shivering. When we had fastened up the
horse we followed her. The door of the church was locked, it seemed,
and the porch afforded the best shelter to be had. Its upper part was
of open woodwork, and freely admitted the wind; but wide eaves
projected over these openings, and over the door, so that at least it
was dry within. By huddling together on the floor against the windward
side we got some protection. I hastily told what had happened.

"So Clarence is gone!" My lady's voice as she said the words trembled,
but not in sorrow or pity as I judged. Rather in relief. Her dread and
hatred of the man were strange and terrible, and so seemed to me then.
Afterward, I learned that something had passed between them which made
almost natural such feelings on her part, and made natural also a
bitter resentment on his. But of that no more. "You are quite sure,"
she said--pressing me anxiously for confirmation--"that it was he!"

"Yes. But I am not sure that he is dead," I explained.

"You seem to bear a charmed life yourself," she said.

"Hush!" cried her husband quickly. "Do not say that to the lad. It is
unlucky. But do you think," he continued--the porch was in darkness,
and we could scarcely make out one another's faces--"that there is any
further chance of pursuit?"

"Not by that party to-night," I said grimly. "Nor I think to-morrow."

"Good!" he answered. "For I can see nothing but water ahead, and it
would be madness to go on by night without a guide. We must stay here
until morning, whatever the risk."

He spoke gloomily--and with reason. Our position was a miserable,
almost a desperate one, even on the supposition that pursuit had
ceased. We had lost all our baggage, food, wraps. We had no guides,
and we were in the midst of a flooded country, with two tender women
and a baby, our only shelter the porch of God's house. Mistress Anne,
who was crouching in the darkest corner next the church, seemed to
have collapsed entirely. I remembered afterward that I did not once
hear her speak that night. The Duchess tried to maintain our spirits
and her own; but in the face of cold, damp, and hunger, she could do
little. Master Bertie and I took it by turns to keep a kind of watch,
but by morning--it was a long night and a bitter one--we were worn
out, and slept despite our misery. We should have been surprised and
captured without a blow if the enemy had come upon us then.

I awoke with a start to find the gray light of a raw misty morning
falling upon and showing up our wretched group. The Duchess's head was
hidden in her cloak; her husband's had sunk on his breast; but
Mistress Anne--I looked at her and shuddered. Had she sat so all
night? Sat staring with that stony face of pain, and those tearless
eyes on the moonlight, on the darkness which had been before the dawn,
on the cold first rays of morning? Stared on all alike, and seen none?
I shuddered and peered at her, alarmed, doubtful, wondering, asking
myself what this was that had happened to her. Had fear and cold
killed her, or turned her brain? "Anne!" I said timidly. "Anne!"

She did not answer nor turn; nor did the fixed gaze of her eyes waver.
I thought she did not hear. "Anne!" I cried again, so loudly that the
Duchess stirred, and muttered something in her sleep. But the girl
showed no sign of consciousness. I put out my hand and touched her.

She turned sharply and saw me, and in an instant drew her skirt away
with a gesture of such dread, loathing repulsion as froze me; while a
violent shudder convulsed her whole frame. Afterward she seemed unable
to withdraw her eyes from me, but sat in the same attitude, gazing at
me with a fixed look of horror, as one might gaze at a serpent, while
tremor after tremor shook her.

I was frightened and puzzled, and was still staring at her, wondering
what I had done, when a footstep fell on the road outside and called
away my attention. I turned from her to see a man's figure looming
dark in the doorway. He looked at us--I suppose he had found the
horses outside--gazing in surprise at the queer group. I bade him
good-morning in Dutch, and he answered as well as his astonishment
would let him. He was a short, stout fellow, with a big face, capable
of expressing a good deal of astonishment. He seemed to be a peasant
or farmer. "What do you here?" he continued, his guttural phrases
tolerably intelligible to me.

I explained as clearly as I could that we were on the way to Wesel.
Then I awoke the Duchess and her husband, and stretching our chilled
and aching limbs, we went outside, the man still gazing at us. Alas!
the day was not much better than the night. We could see but a very
little way, a couple of hundred yards round us only. The rest was
mist--all mist. We appealed to the man for food and shelter, and he
nodded, and, obeying his signs rather than his words, we kicked up our
starved beasts and plodded out into the fog by his side. Anne mounted
silently and without objection, but it was plain that something
strange had happened to her. Her condition was unnatural. The Duchess
gazed at her very anxiously, and, getting no answers, or very scanty
ones, to her questions, shook her head gravely.

But we were on the verge of one pleasure at least. When we reached the
hospitable kitchen of the farmhouse it was joy indeed to stand before
the great turf fire, and feel the heat stealing into our half-frozen
bodies; to turn and warm back and front, while the good wife set bread
and hot milk before us. How differently we three felt in half an hour!
How the Duchess's eyes shone once more! How easily rose the laugh to
our lips! Joy had indeed come with the morning. To be warm and dry and
well fed after being cold and wet and hungry--what a thing this is!

But on one neither food nor warmth seemed to have any effect. Mistress
Anne did, indeed, in obedience to my lady's sharp words, raise her
bowl to her lips. But she set it down quickly and sat looking in dull
apathy at the glowing peat. What had come over her?


Master Bertie went out with the farmer to attend to the horses, and
when he came back he had news.

"There is a lad here," he said in some excitement, "who has just seen
three foreigners ride past on the road, along with two Germans on
pack-horses; five in all. They must be three of the party who followed
us yesterday."

I whistled. "Then Clarence got himself out," I said, shrugging my
shoulders. "Well! well!"

"I expect that is so," Master Bertie answered, the Duchess remaining
silent. "The question arises again, what is to be done?" he continued.
"We may follow them to Wesel, but the good man says the floods are
deep between here and the town, and we shall have Clarence and his
party before us all the way--shall perhaps run straight into their
arms."

"But what else can we do?" I said. "It is impossible to go back."

We held a long conference, and by much questioning of our host learned
that half a league away was a ferry-boat, which could carry as many as
two horses over the river at a time. On the farther side we might hit
a road leading to Santon, three leagues distant. Should we go to
Santon after all? The farmer thought the roads on that side of the
river might not be flooded. We should then be in touch once more with
our Dutch friends and might profit by Master Lindstrom's advice, on
which I for one was now inclined to set a higher value.

"The river is bank full. Are you sure the ferry-boat can cross?" I
asked.

Our host was not certain. And thereupon an unexpected voice struck in.

"Oh, dear, do not let us run any more risks!" it said. It was Mistress
Anne's. She was herself again, trembling, excited, bright-eyed; as
different as possible from the Anne of a few minutes before. A great
change had come over her. Perhaps the warmth had done it.

A third course was suggested, to stay quietly where we were. The
farmhouse stood at some little distance from the road; and though it
was rough--it was very rough, consisting only of two rooms, in one of
which a cow was stalled--still it could furnish food and shelter. Why
not stay there?

But the Duchess wisely, I think, decided against this. "It is
unpleasant to go wandering again," she said with a shiver. "But I
shall not rest until we are within the walls of a town. Master
Lindstrom laid so much stress on that. And I fancy that the party who
overtook us last night are not the main body. Others will have gone to
Wesel by boat perhaps, or along the other bank. There they will meet,
and, learning we have not arrived, they will probably return this way
and search for us."

"Clarence----"

"Yes, if we have Clarence to deal with," Master Bertie assented
gravely, "we cannot afford to lose a point. We will try the ferry."

It was something gained to start dry and warm. But the women's pale
faces--for little by little the fatigue, the want of rest, the fear,
were telling even on the Duchess--were sad to see. I was sore and
stiff myself. The wound I had received so mysteriously had bled
afresh, probably during last night's fight. We needed all our courage
to put a brave face on the matter, and bear up and go out again into
the air, which for the first week in May was cold and nipping.
Suspense and anxiety had told in various ways on all of us. While I
felt a fierce anger against those who were driving us to these
straits. Master Bertie was nervous and excited, alarmed for his wife
and child, and inclined to see an enemy in every bush.

However, we cheered up a little when we reached the ferry and found
the boat could cross without much risk. We had to go over in two
detachments, and it was nearly an hour past noon before we all stood
on the farther bank and bade farewell to the honest soul whose help
had been of so much importance to us. He told us we had three leagues
to go, and we hoped to be at rest in Santon by four o'clock.

But the three leagues turned out to be more nearly five, while the
road was so founderous that we had again and again to quit it.

The evening came on, the light waned, and still we were feeling our
way, so to speak--the women tired and on the verge of tears; the men
muddy to the waist, savage, and impatient. It was eight o'clock, and
dusk was well upon us before we caught sight of the first lights of
Santon, and in fear lest the gates might be shut, pressed forward at
such speed as our horses could compass.

"Do you go on!" the Duchess adjured us. "Anne and I will be safe
enough behind you. Let me take the child, and do you ride on. We
cannot pass the night in the fields."

The importance of securing admission was so great that Master Bertie
and I agreed; and cantered on, soon outstripping our companions, and
almost in the gloom losing sight of them. Dark masses of woods, the
last remnants, apparently, of a forest, lay about the road we had to
traverse. We were passing one of these, scarcely three hundred paces
short of the town, and I was turning in the saddle to see that the
ladies were following safely, when I heard Master Bertie, who was a
bow-shot in front of me, give a sudden cry.

I wheeled round hastily to learn the reason, and was just in time to
see three horsemen sweep into the road before him from the cover of
the trees. They were so close to him--and they filled the road--that
his horse carried him amongst them almost before he could check it, or
so it seemed to me. I heard their loud challenge, saw his arm wave,
and guessed that his sword was out. I spurred desperately to join him,
giving a wild shout of encouragement as I did so. But before I could
come up, or indeed cross half the distance, the scuffle was over. One
man fell headlong from his saddle, one horse fled riderless down the
road, and at sight of this, or perhaps of me, the others turned tail
without more ado and made off, leaving Master Bertie in possession of
the field. The whole thing had passed in the shadow of the wood in
less than half a minute. When I drew rein by him he was sheathing his
sword. "Is it Clarence?" I cried eagerly.

"No, no; I did not see him. I think not," he answered. He was
breathing hard and was very much excited. "They were poor swordsmen,
for Spaniards," he added--"very poor, I thought."

I jumped off my horse, and, kneeling beside the man, turned him over.
He was badly hurt, if not dying, cut across the neck. He looked hard
at him by such light as there was, and did not recognize him as one of
our assailants of the night before.

"I do not think he is a Spaniard," I said slowly. Then a certain
suspicion occurred to my mind, and I stooped lower over him.

"Not a Spaniard?" Master Bertie said stupidly. "How is that?"

Before I answered I raised the man in my arms, and, carrying him
carefully to the side of the road, set him with his back to a tree.
Then I got quickly on my horse. The women were just coming up. "Master
Bertie," I said in a low voice, as I looked this way and that to see
if the alarm had spread, "I am afraid there is a mistake. But say
nothing to them. It is one of the town-guard you have killed!"

"One of the town-guard!" he cried, a light bursting in on him, and
the reins dropping from his hand. "What shall we do? We are lost, man!"




                             CHAPTER XIV.

                       AT BAY IN THE GATEHOUSE.


What was to be done? That was the question, and a terrible question it
was. Behind us we had the inhospitable country, dark and dreary, the
night wind sweeping over it. In front, where the lights twinkled and
the smoke of the town went up, we were like to meet with a savage
reception. And it was no time for weighing alternatives. The choice
had to be made, made in a moment; I marvel to this day at the
quickness with which I made it for good or ill.

"We must get into the town!" I cried imperatively. "And before the
alarm is given. It is hopeless to fly, Master Bertie, and we cannot
spend another night in the fields. Quick, madam!" I continued to the
Duchess, as she came up. I did not wait to hear his opinion, for I saw
he was stunned by the catastrophe. "We have hurt one of the town-guard
through a mistake. We must get through the gate before it is
discovered!"

I seized her rein and flogged up her horse, and gave her no time to
ask questions, but urged on the party at a hand gallop until the gate
was reached. The attempt, I knew, was desperate, for the two men who
had escaped had ridden straight for the town; but I saw no other
resource, and it seemed to me to be better to surrender peaceably, if
that were possible, than to expose the women to another night of such
cold and hunger as the last. And fortune so far favored us that when
we reached the gate it was open. Probably, the patrol having ridden
through to get help, no one had thought fit to close it; and, no one
withstanding us, we spurred our sobbing horses under the archway and
entered the street.

It was a curious entry, and a curious scene we came upon. I remember
now how strange it all looked. The houses, leaning forward in a dozen
quaint forms, clear cut against the pale evening sky, caused a
darkness as of a cavern in the narrow street below. Here and there in
the midst of this darkness hung a lantern, which, making the gloom
away from it seem deeper, lit up the things about it, throwing into
flaring prominence some barred window with a scared face peering from
it, some corner with a puddle, a slinking dog, a broken flight of
steps. Just within the gate stood a brazier full of glowing coal, and
beside it a halbert rested against the wall. I divined that the
watchman had run into the town with the riders, and I drew rein in
doubt, listening and looking. I think if we had ridden straight on
then, all might have been well; or, at least, we might have been
allowed to give ourselves up.

But we hesitated a moment, and were lost. No doubt, though we saw but
one, there were a score of people watching us, who took us for four
men, Master Bertie and I being in front; and these, judging from the
boldness of our entry that there were more behind, concluded that this
was a foray upon the town. At any rate, they took instant advantage of
our pause. With a swift whir an iron pot came hurtling past me, and,
missing the Duchess by a hand's-breadth, went clanking under the
gatehouse. That served for a signal. In a moment an alarm of hostile
cries rose all round us. An arrow whizzed between my horse's feet.
Half a dozen odd missiles, snatched up by hasty hands, came raining in
on us out of the gloom. The town seemed to be rising as one man. A
bell began to ring, and a hundred yards in front, where the street
branched off to right and left, the way seemed suddenly alive from
wall to wall with lights and voices and brandished arms, the gleam of
steel, and the babel of a furious crowd--a crowd making down toward us
with a purpose we needed no German to interpret.


It was a horrible moment; the more horrible that I had not expected
this fury, and was unnerved as well as taken aback by it. Remembering
that I had brought my companions here, and that two were women, one
was a child, I quailed. How could I protect them? There was no
mistaking the stern meaning of those cries, of that rage so much
surpassing anything I had feared. Though I did not know that the man
we had struck down was a bridegroom, and that there were those in the
crowd in whose ears the young wife's piercing scream still rang, I yet
quailed before their yells and curses.

As I glanced round for a place of refuge, my eyes lit on an open
doorway close to me, and close also to the brazier and halbert. It was
a low stone doorway, beetle-browed, with a coat of arms carved over
it. I saw in an instant that it must lead to the tower above us--the
gatehouse; and I sprang from my horse, a fresh yell from the houses
hailing the act. I saw that, if we were to gain a moment for
parleying, we must take refuge there. I do not know how I did it, but
somehow I made myself understood by the others and got the women off
their horses and dragged Mistress Anne inside, where at once we both
fell in the darkness over the lower steps of a spiral staircase. This
hindered the Duchess, who was following, and I heard a scuffle taking
place behind us. But in that confined space--the staircase was very
narrow--I could give no help. I could only stumble upward, dragging
the fainting girl after me, until we emerged through an open doorway
at the top into a room. What kind of room I did not notice then, only
that it was empty. Notice! It was no time for taking notice. The bell
was clanging louder and louder outside. The mob were yelling like
hounds in sight of their quarry. The shouts, the confused cries, and
threats, and questions deafened me. I turned to learn what was
happening behind me. The other two had not come up.

I felt my way down again, one hand on the central pillar, my shoulder
against the outside wall. The stair-foot was faintly lit by the glow
from outside, and on the bottom step I came on some one, hurt or dead,
just a dark mass at my feet. It was Master Bertie. I gave a cry and
leaped over his body. The Duchess, brave wife, was standing before
him, the halbert which she had snatched up presented at the doorway
and the howling mob outside.

Fortunately the crowd had not yet learned how few we were; nor saw, I
think, that it was but a woman who confronted them. To rush into the
low doorway and storm the narrow winding staircase in the face of
unknown numbers was a task from which the bravest veterans might have
flinched, and the townsfolk, furious as they were, hung back. I took
advantage of the pause. I grasped the halbert myself and pushed the
Duchess back. "Drag him up!" I muttered. "If you cannot manage it,
call Anne!"

But grief and hard necessity gave her strength, and, despite the noise
in front of me, I heard her toil panting up with her burden. When I
judged she had reached the room above, I too turned and ran up after
her, posting myself in the last angle just below the room. There I was
sheltered from missiles by the turn in the staircase, and was further
protected by the darkness. Now I could hold the way with little risk,
for only one could come up at a time, and he would be a brave man who
should storm the stairs in my teeth.

All this, I remember, was done in a kind of desperate frenzy, in haste
and confusion, with no plan or final purpose, but simply out of the
instinct of self-preservation, which led me to do, from moment to
moment, what I could to save our lives. I did not know whether there
was another staircase to the tower, nor whether there were enemies
above us; whether, indeed, enemies might not swarm in on us from a
dozen entrances. I had no time to think of more than just this; that
my staircase, of which I did know, must be held.

I think I had stood there about a minute, breathing hard and listening
to the din outside, which came to my ears a little softened by the
thick walls round me--so much softened, at least, that I could hear my
heart beating in the midst of it--when the Duchess came back to the
door above. I could see her, there being a certain amount of light in
the room behind her, but she could not see me. "What can I do?" she
asked softly.

I answered by a question. "Is he alive?" I muttered.

"Yes; but hurt," she answered, struggling with a sob, with a
fluttering of the woman's heart she had repressed so bravely. "Much
hurt, I fear! Oh, why, why did we come here?"

She did not mean it as a reproach, but I took it as one, and braced
myself more firmly to meet this crisis--to save her at least if it
should be any way possible. When she asked again "Can I do anything?"
I bade her take my pike and stand where I was for a moment. Since no
enemy had yet made his appearance above, the strength of our position
seemed to hold out some hope, and it was the more essential that I
should understand it and know exactly what our chances were.


I sprang up the stairs into the room and looked round, my eyes seeming
to take in everything at once. It was a big bare room, with signs of
habitation only in one corner. On the side toward the town was a long,
low window, through which--a score of the diamond panes were broken
already--the flare of the besiegers' torches fell luridly on the walls
and vaulted roof. By the dull embers of a wood fire, over which hung a
huge black pot, Master Bertie was lying on the boards, breathing
loudly and painfully, his head pillowed on the Duchess's kerchief.
Beside him sat Mistress Anne, her face hidden, the child wailing in
her lap. A glance round assured me that there was no other staircase,
and that on the side toward the country, the wall was pierced with no
window bigger than a loophole or an arrow-slit; with no opening which
even a boy could enter. For the present, therefore, unless the top of
the tower should be escaladed from the adjacent houses--and I could do
nothing to provide against that--we had nothing to fear except from
the staircase and the window I have mentioned. Every moment, however,
a missile or a shot crashed through the latter, adding the shiver of
falling glass to the general din. No wonder the child wailed and the
girl sank over it in abject terror. Those savage yells might well make
a woman blench. They carried more fear and dread to my heart than did
the real danger of our position, desperate as it was.

And yet it was so desperate that, for a moment, I leant against the
wall dazed and hopeless, listening to the infernal tumult without and
within. Had Bertie been by my side to share the responsibility and
join in the risk, I could have borne it better. I might have felt then
some of the joy of battle, and the stern pleasure of the one matched
against the many. But I was alone. How was I to save these women and
that poor child from the yelling crew outside? How indeed? I did not
know the enemy's language; I could not communicate with him, could not
explain, could not even cry for quarter for the women.


A stone which glanced from one of the mullions and grazed my shoulder
roused me from this fit of cowardice, which, I trust and believe, had
lasted for a few seconds only. At the same moment an unusual volley of
missiles tore through the window as if discharged at a given signal.
We were under cover, and they did us no harm, rolling for the most
part noisily about the floor. But when the storm ceased and a calm as
sudden followed, I heard a dull, regular sound close to the window--a
thud! thud! thud!--and on the instant divined the plan and the danger.
My courage came back and with it my wits. I remembered an old tale
I had heard, and, dropping my sword where I stood, I flew to the
hearth, and unhooked the great pot. It was heavy; half full of
something--broth, most likely; but I recked nothing of that, I bore it
swiftly to the window, and just as the foremost man on the ladder had
driven in the lead work before him with his ax, flung the whole of the
contents--they were not scalding, but they were very hot--in his face.
The fellow shrieked loudly, and, blinded and taken by surprise, lost
his hold and fell against his supporter, and both tumbled down again
more quickly than they had come up.

Sternly triumphant, I poised the great pot itself in my hands,
thinking to fling it down upon the sea of savage upturned faces, of
which I had a brief view, as the torches flared now on one, now on
another. But prudence prevailed. If no more blood were shed it might
still be possible to get some terms. I laid the pot down by the side
of the window as a weapon to be used only in the last resort.

Meanwhile the Duchess, posted in the dark, had heard the noise of the
window being driven in, and cried out pitifully to know what it was.
"Stand firm!" I shouted loudly. "Stand firm. We are safe as yet."

Even the uproar without seemed to abate a little as the first fury of
the mob died down. Probably their leaders were concerting fresh
action. I went and knelt beside Master Bertie and made a rough
examination of his wound. He had received a nasty blow on the back of
the head, from which the blood was still oozing, and he was
insensible. His face looked very long and thin and deathlike. But, so
far as I could ascertain, the bones were uninjured, and he was now
breathing more quietly. "I think he will recover," I said, easing his
clothes.

Anne was crouching on the other side of him. As she did not answer I
looked up at her. Her lips were moving, but the only word I caught was
"Clarence!" I did not wonder she was distraught; I had work enough to
keep my own wits. But I wanted her help, and I repeated loudly, "Anne!
Anne!" trying to rouse her.

She looked past me shuddering. "Heaven forgive you!" she muttered.
"You have brought me to this! And now I must die! I must die here. In
the net they have set for others is their own foot taken!"

She was quite beside herself with terror. I saw that she was not
addressing me; and I had not time to make sense of her wanderings. I
left her and went out to speak to the Duchess. Poor woman! even her
brave spirit was giving way. I felt her cold hands tremble as I took
the halbert from her. "Go into the room a while," I said softly. "He
is not seriously hurt, I am sure. I will guard this. If any one
appears at the window, scream."

She went gladly, and I took her place, having now to do double duty. I
had been there a few minutes only, listening, with my soul in my ears,
to detect the first signs of attack, either below me or in the room
behind, when I distinguished a strange rustling sound on the
staircase. It appeared to come from a point a good deal below me, and
probably, whoever made it was just within the doorway. I peered into
the gloom, but could see no one as yet. "Stand!" I cried in a tone of
warning. "Who is that?"

The sound ceased abruptly, but it left me uneasy. Could they be going
to blow us up with gunpowder? No! I did not think so. They would not
care to ruin the gateway for the sake of capturing so small a party.
And the tower was strong. It would not be easy to blow it up.

Yet in a short time the noise began again; and my fears returned with
it. "Stand!" I cried savagely, "or take care of yourself."

The answer was a flash of bright light--which for a second showed the
rough stone walls winding away at my feet--a stunning report, and the
pattering down of half a dozen slugs from the roof. I laughed, my
first start over. "You will have to come a little higher up!" I cried
tauntingly, as I smelt the fumes. My eyes had become so accustomed to
the darkness that I felt sure I should detect an assailant, however
warily he might make his approach. And my halbert was seven feet long,
so that I could reach as far as I could see. I had had time, too, to
grow cool.

After this there was comparative quiet for another space. Every now
and then a stone or, more rarely, the ball of an arquebuse would come
whizzing into the room above. But I did not fear this. It was easy to
keep under cover. And their shouting no longer startled me. I began to
see a glimpse of hope. It was plain that the townsfolk were puzzled
how to come at us without suffering great loss. They were unaware of
our numbers, and, as it proved, believed that we had three uninjured
men at least. The staircase was impracticable as a point of assault,
and the window, being only three feet in height and twenty from the
ground, was not much better, if defended, as they expected it would
be, by a couple of desperate swordsmen.


I was not much astonished, therefore, when the rustling sound,
beginning again at the foot of the staircase, came this time to no
more formidable issue than a hail in Spanish. "Will you surrender?"
the envoy cried.

"No!" I said roundly.

"Who are you?" was the next question.

"We are English!" I answered.

He went then; and there for the time the negotiations ended. But,
seeing the dawn of hope, I was the more afraid of any trap or
surprise, and I cried to the Duchess to be on her guard. For this
reason, too, the suspense of the next few minutes was almost more
trying than anything which had gone before. But the minutes came at
last to an end. A voice below cried loudly in English, "Holloa! are
you friends?"

"Yes, yes," I replied joyfully, before the words had well ceased to
rebound from the walls. For the voice and accent were Master
Lindstrom's. A cry of relief from the room behind me showed that
there, too, the speaker was recognized. The Duchess came running to
the door, but I begged her to go back and keep a good lookout. And she
obeyed.

"How come you here? How has it happened?" Master Lindstrom asked, his
voice, though he still remained below, betraying his perplexity and
unhappiness. "Can I not do something? This is terrible, indeed."

"You can come up, if you like," I answered, after a moment's thought.
"But you must come alone. And I cannot let even you, friend as you
are, see our defenses."

As he came up I stepped back and drew the door of the room toward me,
so that, though a little light reached the head of the stairs, he
could not, standing there, see into the room or discern our real
weakness. I did not distrust him--Heaven forbid! but he might have to
tell all he saw to his friends below, and I thought it well, for his
sake as well as our own, that he should be able to do this freely, and
without hurting us. As he joined me I held up a finger for silence and
listened keenly. But all was quiet below. No one had followed him.
Then I turned and warmly grasped his hands, and we peered into one
another's faces. I saw he was deeply moved; that he was thinking of
Dymphna, and how I had saved her. He held my hands as though he would
never loose them.

"Well!" I said, as cheerfully as I could, "have you brought us an
offer of terms? But let me tell you first," I continued, "how it
happened." And I briefly explained that we had mistaken the captain of
the guard and his two followers for Clarence and the two Spaniards.
"Is he dead?" I continued.

"No, he is still alive," Master Lindstrom answered gravely. "But the
townsfolk are furious, and the seizure of the tower has still further
exasperated them. Why did you do it?"

"Because we should have been torn to pieces if we had not done it," I
answered dryly. "You think we are in a strait place?"

"Do you not think so yourself?" he said, somewhat astonished.

I laughed. "That is as may be," I answered with an affectation of
recklessness. "The staircase is narrow and the window low. We shall
sell our lives dearly, my friend. Yet, for the sake of the women who
are with us, we are willing to surrender if the citizens offer us
terms. After all, it was an accident. Cannot you impress this on
them?" I added eagerly.

He shook his head. "They will not hear reason," he said.

"Then," I replied, "impress the other thing upon them. Tell them that
our swords are sharp and we are desperate."

"I will see what I can do," he answered slowly. "The Duke of Cleves is
expected here to-morrow, and the townsfolk feel they would be
disgraced forever if he should find their gate held by a party of
marauders, as they consider you."

"The Duke of Cleves?" I repeated. "Perhaps he may be better affected
toward us."

"They will overpower you before he comes," Master Lindstrom answered
despondently. "I would put no trust in him if I were you. But I will
go to them, and, believe me, I will do all that man can do."

"Of that I am sure," I said warmly. And then, cautioning me to remain
strictly on the defensive, he left me.


Before his footsteps had ceased to echo on the stairs the door beside
me opened, and Mistress Anne appeared at it. I saw at once that his
familiar voice had roused her from the stupor of fear in which I had
last seen her. Her eyes were bright, her whole frame was thrilling
with excitement, hope, suspense. I began to understand her; to discern
beneath the disguise thrown over it in ordinary times by a strong
will, the nervous nature which was always confident or despairing,
which felt everything so keenly--everything, that is, which touched
itself. "Well?" she cried, "well?"

"Patience! patience!" I replied rather sharply. I could not help
comparing her conduct with that of the Duchess, and blaming her, not
for her timidity, but for the selfishness which she had betrayed in
her fear. I could fancy Petronilla trembling and a coward, but not
despairing nor utterly cast down, nor useless when others needed her,
nor wrapped in her own terrors to the very exclusion of reason.
"Patience!" I said; "he is coming back. He and his friends will do all
they can for us. We must wait a while and hope, and keep a good
lookout."

She had her hand on the door, and by an abrupt movement, she slipped
out to me and closed it behind her. This made the staircase so dark
that I could no longer distinguish her face, but I judged from her
tone that her fears were regaining possession of her. "Clarence," she
muttered, her voice low and trembling. "Have you thought of him? Could
not he help us? He may have followed us here, and may be here now.
Now! And perhaps he does not know in what danger we are."

"Clarence!" I said, astonished and almost angry. "Clarence help us? Go
back, girl, go back. You are mad. He would be more likely to complete
our ruin. Go in and nurse the baby!" I added bitterly.

What could she mean, I asked myself, when she had gone in. Was there
anything in her suggestion? Would Clarence follow us hither? If so,
and if he should come in time, would he have power to help us, using
such mysterious influence, Spanish or English, as he seemed to
possess? And if he could help us, would it be better to fall into his
hands than into those of the exasperated Santonese? I thought the
Duchess would say "No!"

So it mattered not what I answered myself. I hoped, now Master
Lindstrom had appeared, that the women would be allowed to go free;
and it seemed to me that to surrender to Clarence would be to hand
over the Duchess to her enemy simply that the rest of us might escape.

Master Lindstrom returned while I was still considering this, and,
observing the same precautions as before, I bade him join me. "Well?"
I said, not so impetuously, I hope, as Mistress Anne, yet I dare say
with a good deal of eagerness. "Well, what do they say?" For he was
slow to speak.

"I have bad news," he answered gently.

"Ah!" I ejaculated, a lump which was due as much to rage as to any
other emotion rising in my throat. "So they will give us no terms?
Then so be it! Let them come and take us."

"Nay," he hastened to answer. "It is not so bad as that, lad. They are
fathers and husbands themselves, and not lanzknechts. They will suffer
the women to go free, and will even let me take charge of them if
necessary."

"They will!" I exclaimed, overjoyed. I wondered why on earth he had
hesitated to tell me this. "Why, that is the main point, friend."

"Yes," he said gravely, "perhaps so. More, the men may go too, if the
tower be surrendered within an hour. With one exception, that is. The
man who struck the blow must be given up."

"The man who struck the blow!" I repeated slowly. "Do you mean--you
mean the man who cut the patrol down?"

"Yes," he said. He was peering very closely at me, as though he would
learn from my face who it was. And I stood thinking. This was as much
as we could expect. I divined, and most truly, that but for the honest
Dutchman's influence, promises, perhaps bribes, such terms would never
have been offered to us by the men who hours before had driven us to
hold as if we had been vermin. Yet give up Master Bertie? "What," I
said, "will be done to him? The man who must be given up, I mean?"
Master Lindstrom shook his head. "It was an accident," I urged, my
eyes on his.

He grasped my hand firmly, and, turning away his face, seemed for a
while unable to speak. At last he whispered, "He must suffer for the
others, lad. I fear so. It is a hard fate, a cruel fate. But I can do
no more. They will not hear me on this. It is true he will be first
tried by the magistrate, but there is no hope. They are very hard."

My heart sank. I stood irresolute, pondering on what we ought to do,
pondering on what I should say to the wife who so loved the man who
must die. What could I say? Yet, somehow I must break the news. I
asked Master Lindstrom to wait where he was while I consulted the
others, adding, "You will answer for it that there will be no attack
while you are here, I suppose?"

"I will," he said. I knew I could trust him, and I went in to the
Duchess, closing the door behind me. A change had come over the room
since I had left it. The moon had risen and was flinging its cold
white light through the twisted and shattered framework of the window,
to fall in three bright panels on the floor. The torches in the street
had for the most part burned out, or been extinguished. In place of
the red glare, the shouts and the crash of glass, the atmosphere of
battle and strife I had left, I found this silvery light and a
stillness made more apparent by the distant hum of many voices.

Mistress Anne was standing just within the threshold, her face showing
pale against the gloom, her hands clasped. The Duchess was kneeling by
her husband, but she looked up as I entered.

"They will let us all go," I said bluntly; it was best to tell the
tale at once--"except the one who hurt the patrol, that is."

It was strange how differently the two women received the news; while
Mistress Anne flung her hands to her face with a sobbing cry of
thankfulness, and leaned against the wall crying and shaking, my lady
stood up straight and still, breathing hard but saying nothing. I saw
that she did not need to ask what would be done to the one who was
excepted. She knew. "No," she murmured at last, her hands pressed to
her bosom, "we cannot do it! Oh, no, no!"

"I fear we must," I said gently--calmly, too, I think. Yet in saying
it I was not quite myself. An odd sensation was growing upon me in the
stillness of the room. I began on a sudden, I did not know why, to
thrill with excitement, to tremble with nervousness, such as would
rather have become one of the women than a man. My head grew hot, my
heart began to beat quickly. I caught myself looking out, listening,
waiting for something to happen, something to be said. It was
something more terrible, as it seemed to me, than the din and crash of
the worst moments of the assault. What was it? What was it that was
threatening my being? An instant and I knew.

"Oh, no, never!" cried the Duchess again, her voice quivering, her
face full of keenest pain. "We will not give you up. We will stand or
fall together, friend."

Give _you_ up! Give _you_ up! Ha! The veil was lifted now, and I saw
what the something with the cold breath going before it was. I looked
quietly from her to her husband; and I asked--I fancy she thought my
question strangely irrelevant at that moment, "How is he? Is he
better?"

"Much better. He knew me for a moment," she answered. "Then he seemed
to sink away again. But his eyes were quite clear."

I stood gazing down at his thin face, which had ever looked so kindly
into mine. My fingers played idly with the knot of my sword. "He will
live?" I asked abruptly, harshly.

She started at the sudden question. But, brutal as it must have
sounded, she was looking at me in pity so great and generous that it
did not wound her. "Oh, yes," she said, her eyes still clinging to me.
"I think he will live, thank Heaven!"

Thank Heaven! Ah, yes, thank Heaven!

I turned and went slowly toward the door. But before I reached it she
was at my side, nay, was on her knees by me, clasping my hand, looking
up to me with streaming eyes. "What are you going to do?" she cried,
reading, I suppose, something in my face.

"I will see if Master Lindstrom cannot get better terms for us," I
answered.

She rose, still detaining me. "You are sure?" she said, still eying me
jealously.

"Quite sure," I answered, forcing a smile. "I will come back and
report to you."

She let me go then, and I went out and joined Lindstrom on the
staircase.

"Are you certain," I asked, speaking in a whisper, "that they
will--that the town will keep its word and let the others go?"

"I am quite sure of it," he replied nodding. "They are Germans, and
hard and pitiless, but you may trust them. So far I will answer for
them."

"Then we accept," I said gravely. "I give myself up. Let them take
me."




                             CHAPTER XV.

                          BEFORE THE COURT.


I had not seen the first moonbeams pierce the broken casement of the
tower-room, but I was there to watch the last tiny patch of silver
glide aslant from wall to sill, and sill to frame, and so pass out.
Near the fire, which had been made up, and now glowed and crackled
bravely on the hearthstone at my elbow, my three jailers had set a
mattress for me; and on this I sat, my back to the wall and my face to
the window. The guards lounged on the other side of the hearth round a
lantern, playing at dice and drinking. They were rough, hard men,
whose features, as they leaned over the table and the light played
strongly on their faces, blazoning them against a wall of shadow, were
stern and rugged enough. But they had not shown themselves unkindly.
They had given me a share of their wine, and had pointed to the window
and shrugged their shoulders, as much as to say that it was my own
fault if I suffered from the draught. Nay, from time to time, one of
them would turn from his game and look at me--in pity, I think--and
utter a curse that was meant for encouragement.

Even when the first excitement had passed away, I felt none of the
stupefaction which I have heard that men feel in such a position. My
brain was painfully active. In vain I longed to sleep, if it were only
that I might not be thought to fear death. But the fact that I was to
be tried first, though the sentence was a certainty, distracted and
troubled me. My thoughts paced from thing to thing; now dwelling on
the Duchess and her husband, now flitting to Petronilla and Sir
Anthony, to the old place at home and the servants; to strange petty
things, long familiar--a tree in the chase at Coton, an herb I had
planted. Once a great lump rose in my throat, and I had to turn away
to hide the hot tears that would rise at the thought that I must die
in this mean German town, in this unknown corner, and be buried and
forgotten! And once, too, to torment me, there rose a doubt in my mind
whether Master Bertie would recover; whether, indeed, I had not thrown
my life away for nothing. But it was too late to think of that! And
the doubt, which the Evil One himself must have suggested, so terrible
was it passed away quickly.

My thoughts raced, but the night crawled. We had surrendered about
ten, and the magistrates, less pitiful than the jailers, had forbidden
my friends to stay with me. An hour or more after midnight, two of the
men lay down and the other sat humming a drinking-song, or at
intervals rose to yawn and stretch himself and look out of the window.
From time to time, the cry of the watchman going his rounds came
drearily to my ears, recalling to me the night I had spent behind the
boarding in Moorgate Street, when the adventure which was to end
to-morrow--nay, to-day--in a few hours--had lured me away. To-day? Was
I to die to-day? To perish with all my plans, hopes, love? It seemed
impossible. As I gazed at the window, whose shape began to be printed
on my brain, it seemed impossible. My soul so rose in rebellion
against it, that the perspiration stood on my brow, and I had to clasp
my hands about my knees, and strain every muscle to keep in the cry I
would have uttered! a cry, not of fear, but of rage and remonstrance
and revolt.

I was glad to see the first streaks of dawn, to hear the first
cock-crowings, and, a few minutes later, the voices of men in the
street and on the stairs. The sounds of day and life acted magically
upon me. The horror of the night passed off as does the horror of a
dream. When a man, heavily cloaked and with his head covered, came in,
the door being shut behind him by another hand, I looked up at him
bravely. The worst was past.

He replied by looking down at me for a few moments without disclosing
himself, the collar of his cloak being raised so high that I could see
nothing of his features. My first notion that he must be Master
Lindstrom passed away; and, displeased by his silent scrutiny, and
thinking him a stranger, I said sharply, "I hope you are satisfied,
sir."

"Satisfied?" he replied, in a voice which made me start so that the
irons clanked on my feet, "Well, I think I should be--seeing you so,
my friend!"

It was Clarence! Of all men, Clarence! I knew his voice, and he,
seeing himself recognized, lowered his cloak. I stared at him in
stupefied silence, and he at me in a grim curiosity. I was not
prepared for the blunt abruptness with which he continued--using
almost the very words he had used when face to face with me in the
flood: "Now tell me who you are, and what brought you into this
company?"

I gave him no answer. I still stared at him in silence.

"Come!" he continued, his hawk's eyes bent on my face, "make a clean
breast of it, and perhaps--who knows? I may help you yet, lad. You
have puzzled and foiled me, and I want to understand you. Where did my
lady pick you up just when she wanted you? I had arranged for every
checker on the board except you. Who are you?"

This time I did answer him--by a question. "How many times have we
met?" I asked.

"Three," he said readily, "and the last time you nearly rid the world
of me. Now the luck is against you. It generally is in the end against
those who thwart me, my friend." He chuckled at the conceit, and I
read in his face at once his love of intrigue and his vanity. "I come
uppermost, as always."

I only nodded.

"What do you want?" I asked. I felt a certain expectation. He wanted
something.

"First, to know who you are."

"I shall not tell you!" I answered.

He smiled dryly, sitting opposite to me. He had drawn up a stool, and
made himself comfortable. He was not an uncomely man as he sat there
playing with his dagger, a dubious smile on his lean, dark face.
Unwarned, I might have been attracted by the masterful audacity, the
intellect as well as the force which I saw stamped on his features.
Being warned, I read cunning in his bold eyes, and cruelty in the curl
of his lip. "What do you want next?" I asked.

"I want to save your life," he replied lightly.

At that I started--I could not help it.

"Ha! ha!" he laughed, "I thought the stoicism did not go quite down to
the bottom, my lad. But there, it is true enough, I have come to help
you. I have come to save your life if you will let me."

I strove in vain to keep entire mastery over myself. The feelings to
which he appealed were too strong for me. My voice sounded strange,
even in my own ears, as I said hoarsely, "It is impossible! What can
you do?"

"What can I do?" he answered with a stern smile. "Much! I have, boy, a
dozen strings in my hands, and a neck--a life at the end of each!"

He raised his hand, and extending the fingers, moved them to and fro.

"See! see! A life, a death!" he exclaimed. "And for you, I can and
will save your life--on one condition."

"On one condition?" I murmured.

"Ay, on one condition; but it is a very easy one. I will save your
life on my part; and you, on yours, must give me a little assistance.
Do you see? Then we shall be quits."

"I do not understand," I said dully. I did not. His words had set my
heart fluttering so that I could for the moment take in only one
idea--that here was a new hope of life.

"It is very simple," he resumed, speaking slowly. "Certain plans of
mine require that I should get your friend the Duchess conveyed back
to England. But for you I should have succeeded before this. In what
you have hindered me, you can now help me. You have their confidence
and great influence with them. All I ask is that you will use that
influence so that they may be at a certain place at a certain hour. I
will contrive the rest. It shall never be known, I promise you, that
you----"

"Betrayed them!"

"Well, gave me some information," he said lightly, puffing away my
phrase.

"No. Betrayed them!" I persisted.

"Put it so, if you please," he replied, shrugging his shoulders and
raising his eyebrows. "What is in a word?"

"You are the tempter himself, I think!" I cried in bitter rage--for it
_was_ bitter--bitter, indeed, to feel that new-born hope die out. "But
you come to me in vain. I defy you!"

"Softly! softly!" he answered with calmness.

Yet I saw a little pulse beating in his cheek that seemed to tell of
some emotion kept in subjection.

"It frightens you at first," he said. "But listen. You will do them no
harm, and yourself good. I shall get them anyway, both the Duchess and
her husband; though, without your aid, it will be more difficult. Why,
help of that kind is given every day. They need never know it. Even
now there is one of whom you little dream who has----"

"Silence!" I cried fiercely. "I care not. I defy you!"

I could think of only one thing. I was wild with rage and
disappointment. His words had aggravated the pain of every regret,
every clinging to life I felt.

"Go!" I cried. "Go and leave me, you villain!"

"If I do leave you," he said, fixing his eyes on me, "it will be, my
friend--to death."

"Then so be it!" I answered wildly. "So be it! I will keep my honor."

"Your honor!" The mask dropped from his face, and he sneered as he
rose from his seat. A darker scowl changed and disfigured his brow,
as he lost hope of gaining me. "Your honor? Where will it be by
to-night?" he hissed, his eyes glowering down at me. "Where a week
hence, when you will be cast into a pit and forgotten? Your honor,
fool? What is the honor of a dead man? Pah! But die, then, if you will
have it so! Die, like the brainless brute you are! And rot, and be
forgotten!" he concluded passionately.


They were terrible words; more terrible I know now than either he or I
understood then. They so shook me that when he was gone I crouched
trembling on my pallet, hiding my face in a fit of horror--taking no
heed of my jailers or of appearances. "Die and be forgotten! Die and
be forgotten!" The doom rang in my ears.

Something which seemed to me angelic roused me from this misery. It
was the sound of a kindly, familiar voice speaking English. I looked
up and found the Dutchman bending over me with a face of infinite
distress. With him, but rather behind him, stood Van Tree, pale and
vicious-eyed, tugging his scanty chin-beard and gazing about him like
a dog seeking some one to fasten upon. "Poor lad! poor lad!" the old
man said, his voice shaking as he looked at me.

I sprang to my feet, the irons rattling as I dashed my hand across my
eyes.

"It is all right!" I said hurriedly. "I had a--but never mind that. It
was like a dream. Only tell the Duchess to look to herself," I
continued, still rather vehemently. "Clarence is here. He is in
Santon. I have seen him."

"You have seen him?" both the Dutchmen cried at once.

"Ay!" I said, with a laugh that was three parts hysterical--indeed, I
was still tingling all over with excitement. "He has been here to
offer me my life if I would help him in his schemes. I told him he was
the tempter, and defied him. And he--he said I should die and be
forgotten!" I added, trembling, yet laughing wildly at the same time.

"I think he _is_ the tempter!" said Master Lindstrom solemnly, his
face very grim. "And therefore a liar and the father of lies! You may
die, lad, to-day; perhaps you must. But forgotten you shall not be,
while we live, or one of us lives, or one of the children who shall
come after us. He is a liar!"

I got my hands, with a struggle, from the old man, and turning my back
upon him, went and looked out of the window. The sun was rising. The
tower of the great minster, seen row for the first time, rose in
stately brightness above the red roofs and quaint gables and the
rows of dormer windows. Down in the streets the grayness and chill
yet lingered. But above was a very glory of light and warmth and
color--the rising of the May sun. When I turned round I was myself
again. The calm beauty of that sight had stolen into my soul. "Is it
time?" I said cheerfully. For the crowd was gathering below, and there
were voices and feet on the stairs.

"I think it is," Master Lindstrom answered. "We have obtained leave to
go with you. You need fear no violence in the streets, for the man who
was hurt is still alive and may recover. I have been with the
magistrates this morning," he continued, "and found them better
disposed to you; but the Sub-dean has joint jurisdiction with them, as
the deputy of the Bishop of Arras, who is dean of the minster; and he
is, for some reason, very bitter against you."

"The Bishop of Arras? Granville, do you mean?" I asked. I knew the
name of the Emperor's shrewd and powerful minister, by whose advice
the Netherlands were at this time ruled.

"The same. He, of course, is not here, but his deputy is. Were it not
for him---- But there, it is no good talking of that!" the Dutchman
said, breaking off and rubbing his head in his chagrin.

One of the guards who had spent the night with me brought me at this
moment a bowl of broth with a piece of bread in it. I could not eat
the bread, but I drank the broth and felt the better for it. Having in
my pocket a little money with which the Duchess had furnished me, I
put a silver piece in the bowl and handed it back to him. The man
seemed astonished, and muttered something in German as he turned away.

"What did he say?" I asked the Dutchman.

"Oh, nothing, nothing," he answered.

"But what was it? It was something," I persisted, seeing him confused.

"He--well, he said he would have a mass said for you!" Lindstrom
answered in despair. "It will do no harm."

"No, why should it?" I replied mechanically.


We were in the street by this time, Master Lindstrom and Van Tree
walking beside me in the middle of a score of soldiers, who seemed to
my eyes fantastically dressed. I remarked, as we passed out, a tall
man clothed in red and black, who was standing by the door as if
waiting to fall in behind me. He carried on his shoulder a long
broad-bladed sword, and I guessed who he was, seeing how Master
Lindstrom strove to intercept my view of him. But I was not afraid of
_that_. I had heard long ago--perhaps six months in time, but it
seemed long ago--how bravely Queen Jane had died. And if a girl had
not trembled, surely a man should not. So I looked steadfastly at him,
and took great courage, and after that was able to gaze calmly on the
people, who pressed to stare at me, peeping over the soldiers'
shoulders, and clustering in every doorway and window to see me go
past. They were all silent, and it even seemed to me that some--but
this may have been my fancy--pitied me.

I saw nothing of the Duchess, and might have wondered, had not Master
Lindstrom explained that he had contrived to keep her in ignorance of
the hour fixed for the proceedings. Her husband was better, he said,
and conscious; but, for fear of exciting him, they were keeping the
news from him also. I remember I felt for a moment very sore at this,
and then I tried to persuade myself that it was right.

The distance through the streets was short, and almost before I was
aware of it I was in the court-house, the guard had fallen back, and I
was standing before three persons who were seated behind a long table.
Two of them were grave, portly men wearing flat black caps and scarlet
robes, with gold chains about their necks. The third, dressed as an
ecclesiastic, wore a huge gem ring upon his thumb. Behind them stood
three attendants holding a sword, a crosier, and a ducal cap upon a
cushion; and above and behind all was a lofty stained window, whose
rich hues, the sun being low as yet, shot athwart the corbels of the
roof. At the end of the table sat a black-robed man with an ink-horn
and spectacles, a grave, still, down-looking man; and the crowd being
behind me, and preserving a dead silence, and the attendants standing
like statues, I seemed indeed to be alone with these four at the
table, and the great stained window and the solemn hush. They talked
to one another in low tones for a minute, gazing at me the while. And
I fancied they were astonished to find me so young.

At length they all fell back into their chairs. "Do you speak German?"
the eldest burgher said, addressing me gravely. He sat in the middle,
with the Sub-dean on his right.

"No; but I speak and understand Spanish," I answered in that language,
feeling chilled already by the stern formality which like an iron hand
was laying its grip upon me.

"Good! Your name?" replied the president.

"I am commonly called Francis Carey, and I am an Englishman." The
Sub-dean--he was a pale, stout man, with gloomy eyes--had hitherto
been looking at me in evident doubt. But at this he nodded assent,
and, averting his eyes from me, gazed meditatively at the roof of the
hall, considering apparently what he should have for breakfast.

"You are charged," said the president slowly, consulting a document,
"with having assaulted and wounded in the highway last night one
Heinrich Schrder, a citizen of this town, acting at the time as
Lieutenant of the Night Guard. Do you admit this, prisoner, or do you
require proof?"

"He was wounded," I answered steadily, "but by mistake, and in error.
I supposed him to be one of three persons who had unlawfully waylaid
me and my party on the previous night between Emmerich and Wesel."

The Sub-dean, still gazing at the roof, shook his head with a faint
smile. The other magistrates looked doubtfully at me, but made no
comment, and my words seemed to be wasted on the silence. The
president consulted his document again, and continued: "You are also
charged with having by force of arms, in time of peace, seized a gate
of this town, and maintained it, and declined to surrender it when
called upon so to do. What do you say to that?"

"It is true in part," I answered firmly. "I seized not the gate, but
part of the tower, in order to preserve my life and to protect certain
ladies traveling with me from the violence of a crowd which, under a
misapprehension, was threatening to do us a mischief."

The priest again shook his head, and smiled faintly at the carved
roof. His colleagues were perhaps somewhat moved in my favor, for a
few words passed between them. However, in the end they shook their
heads, and the president mechanically asked me if I had anything
further to say.

"Nothing!" I replied bitterly. The ecclesiastic's cynical
heedlessness, his air of one whose mind is made up, seemed so cruel to
me whose life was at stake, that I lost patience. "Except what I have
said," I continued--"that for the wounding, it was done in error; and
for the gate-seizing, I would do it again to save the lives of those
with me. Only that and this: that I am a foreigner ignorant of your
language and customs, desiring only to pass peacefully through your
country."

"That is all?" the president asked impassively.

"All," I answered, yet with a strange tightening at my throat. Was it
all? All I could say for my life?

I was waiting, sore and angry and desperate, to hear the sentence,
when there came an interruption. Master Lindstrom, whose presence at
my side I had forgotten, broke suddenly into a torrent of impassioned
words, and his urgent voice, ringing through the court, seemed in a
moment to change its aspect--to infuse into it some degree of life and
sympathy. More than one guttural exclamation, which seemed to mark
approval, burst from the throng at the back of the hall. In another
moment, indeed, the Dutchman's courage might have saved me. But there
was one who marked the danger. The Sub-dean, who had at first only
glowered at the speaker in rude astonishment, now cut him short with a
harsh question.

"One moment, Master Dutchman!" he cried. "Are you one of the heretics
who call themselves Protestants?"

"I am. But I understand that there is here liberty of conscience," our
friend answered manfully, nothing daunted in his fervor at finding the
attack turned upon himself.

"That depends upon the conscience," the priest answered with a scowl.
"We will have no Anabaptists here, nor foreign praters to bring us
into feud with our neighbors. It is enough that such men as you are
allowed to live. We will not be bearded by you, so take warning! Take
heed, I say, Master Dutchman, and be silent!" he repeated, leaning
forward and clapping his hand upon the table.

I touched Master Lindstrom's sleeve--who would of himself have
persisted--and stayed him. "It is of no use," I muttered. "That dog in
a crochet has condemned me. He will have his way!"

There was a short debate between the three judges, while in the court
you might have heard a pin drop. Master Lindstrom had fallen back once
more. I was alone again, and the stained window seemed to be putting
forth its mystic influence to enfold me, when, looking up, I saw a
tiny shadow flit across the soft many-hued rays which streamed from it
athwart the roof. It passed again, once, twice, thrice. I peered
upward intently. It was a swallow flying to and fro amid the carved
work.

Yes, a swallow. And straightway I forgot the judges; forgot the crowd.
The scene vanished and I was at Coton End again, giving Martin Luther
the nest for Petronilla--a sign, as I meant it then, that I should
return. I should never return now. Yet my heart was on a sudden so
softened that, instead of this reflection giving me pain, as one would
have expected, it only filled me with a great anxiety to provide for
the event. She must not wait and watch for me day after day, perhaps
year after year. I must see to it somehow; and I was thinking with
such intentness of this, that it was only vaguely I heard the sentence
pronounced. It might have been some other person who was to be
beheaded at the east gate an hour before noon. And so God save the
Duke!




                             CHAPTER XVI.

                         IN THE DUKE'S NAME.


They took me back to the room in the tower, it being now nearly ten
o'clock. Master Lindstrom would fain have stayed with me constantly to
the end, but having the matter I have mentioned much in my mind, I
begged him to go and get me writing materials. When he returned Van
Tree was with him. With a particularity very curious at that moment, I
remarked that the latter was carrying something.

"Where did you get that?" I said sharply and at once.

"It is your haversack," he answered, setting it down quietly. "I found
the man who had taken possession of your horse, and got it from him. I
thought there might be something in it you might like."

"It is my haversack," I assented. "But it was not on my horse. I have
not seen it since I left it in Master Lindstrom's house by the river.
I left it on the pallet in my room there, and it was forgotten. I
searched for it at Emmerich, you remember."

"I only know," he replied, "that I discovered it behind the saddle of
the horse you were riding yesterday."

He thought that I had become confused and was a little wrong-headed
from excitement. Master Lindstrom also felt troubled, as he told me
afterward, at seeing me taken up with a trifle at such a time.

But there was nothing wrong with my wits, as I promptly showed them.

"The horse I was riding yesterday?" I continued. "Ah! then, I
understand. I was riding the horse which I took from the Spanish
trooper. The Spaniard must have annexed the haversack when he and his
companions searched the house after our departure."

"That is it, no doubt," Master Lindstrom said. "And in the hurry of
yesterday's ride you failed to notice it."

It was a strange way of recovering one's property--strange that the
enemy should have helped one to it. But there are times--and this to
me was one--when the strange seems the ordinary and commonplace. I
took the sack and slipped my hand through a well-known slit in the
lining. Yes, the letter I had left there was there still--the letter
to Mistress Clarence. I drew it out. The corners of the little packet
were frayed, and the parchment was stained and discolored, no doubt by
the damp which had penetrated to it. But the seal was whole. I placed
it, as it was, in Master Lindstrom's hands.

"Give it," I said, "to the Duchess afterward. It concerns her. You
have heard us talk about it. Bid her make what use she pleases of it."

I turned away then and sat down, feeling a little flurried and
excited, as one about to start upon a journey might feel; not afraid
nor exceedingly depressed, but braced up to make a brave show and hide
what sadness I did feel by the knowledge that many eyes were upon me,
and that more would be watching me presently. At the far end of the
room a number of people had now gathered, and were conversing
together. Among them were not only my jailers of the night, but two or
three officers, a priest who had come to offer me his services, and
some inquisitive gazers who had obtained admission. Their curiosity,
however, did not distress me. On the contrary, I was glad to hear the
stir and murmur of life about me to the last.

I will not set down the letter I wrote to the Duchess, though it were
easy for me to do so, seeing that her son has it now. It contains some
things very proper to be said by a dying man, of which I am not
ashamed--God forbid! but which it would not be meet for me to repeat
here. Enough that I told her in a few words who I was, and entreated
her, in the name of whatever services I had rendered her, to let
Petronilla and Sir Anthony know how I had died. And I added something
which would, I thought, comfort her and her husband--namely, that I
was not afraid, or in any suffering of mind or body.

The writing of this shook my composure a little. But as I laid down
the pen and looked up and found that the time was come, I took courage
in a marvelous manner. The captain of the guard--I think that out of a
compassionate desire not to interrupt me they had allowed me some
minutes of grace--came to me, leaving the group at the other end, and
told me gravely that I was waited for. I rose at once and gave the
letter to Master Lindstrom with some messages in which Dymphna and
Anne were not forgotten. And then, with a smile--for I felt under all
those eyes as if I were going into battle--I said: "Gentlemen, I am
ready if you are. It is a fine day to die. You know," I added gayly,
"in England we have a proverb, 'The better the day, the better the
deed!' So it is well to have a good day to have a good death, Sir
Captain."

"A soldier's death, sir, is a good death;" he answered gravely,
speaking in Spanish and bowing.

Then he pointed to the door.

As I walked toward it, I paused momentarily by the window, and looked
out on the crowd below. It filled the sunlit street--save where a
little raised platform strewn with rushes protruded itself--with heads
from wall to wall, with faces all turned one way--toward me. It was a
silent crowd standing in hushed awe and expectation, the consciousness
of which for an instant sent a sudden chill to my heart, blanching my
cheek, and making my blood run slow for a moment. The next I moved on
to the door, and bowing to the spectators as they stood aside, began
to descend the narrow staircase.

There were guards going down before me, and behind me were Master
Lindstrom and more guards. The Dutchman reached forward in the gloom,
and clasped my hand, holding it, as we went down, in a firm, strong
grip.

"Never fear," I said to him cheerily, looking back. "It is all right."

He answered in words which I will not write here; not wishing, as I
have said, to make certain things common.

I suppose the doorway at the bottom was accidentally blocked, for a
few steps short of it we came to a standstill; and almost at the same
moment I started, despite myself, on hearing a sudden clamor and a
roar of many voices outside.

"What is it?" I asked the Dutchman.

"It is the Duke of Cleves arriving, I expect," he whispered. "He comes
in by the other gate."


A moment later we moved on and passed out into the light, the soldiers
before me stepping on either side to give me place. The sunshine for
an instant dazzled me, and I lowered my eyes. As I gradually raised
them again I saw before me a short lane formed by two rows of
spectators kept back by guards; and at the end of this, two or three
rough wooden steps leading to a platform on which were standing a
number of people. And above and beyond all only the bright blue sky,
the roofs and gables of the nearer houses showing dark against it.

I advanced steadily along the path left for me, and would have
ascended the steps. But at the foot of them I came to a standstill,
and looked round for guidance. The persons on the scaffold all had
their backs turned to me, and did not make way, while the shouting and
uproar hindered them from hearing that we had come out. Then it struck
me, seeing that the people at the windows were also gazing away, and
taking no heed of me, that the Duke was passing the farther end of the
street, and a sharp pang of angry pain shot through me. I had come out
to die, but that which was all to me was so little to these people
that they turned away to see a fellow-mortal ride by!

Presently, as we stood there, in a pit, as it were, getting no view, I
felt Master Lindstrom's hand, which still clasped mine, begin to
shake; and turning to him, I found that his face had changed to a deep
red, and that his eyes were protruding with a kind of convulsive
eagerness which instantly infected me.

"What is it?" I stammered. I began to tremble also. The air rang, it
seemed to me, with one word, which a thousand tongues took up and
reiterated. But it was a German word, and I did not understand it.

"Wait! wait!" Master Lindstrom exclaimed. "Pray God it be true!"

He seized my other hand and held it as though he would protect me from
something. At the same moment Van Tree pushed past me, and, bounding
up the steps, thrust his way through the officials on the scaffold,
causing more than one fur-robed citizen near the edge to lose his
balance and come down as best he could on the shoulders of the guards.

"What is it?" I cried. "What is it?" I cried in impatient wonder.

"Oh! my lad, my lad!" Master Lindstrom answered, his face close to
mine, and the tears running down his cheeks. "It is cruel if it be not
true! Cruel! They cry a pardon!"

"A pardon?" I echoed.

"Ay, lad, a pardon. But it may not be true," he said, putting his arm
about my shoulder. "Do not make too sure of it. It is only the mob cry
it out."

My heart made a great bound, and seemed to stand still. There was a
loud surging in my brain, and a mist rose before my eyes and hid
everything. The clamor and shouting of the street passed away, and
sounded vague and distant. The next instant, it is true, I was myself
again, but my knees were trembling under me, and I stood flaccid and
unnerved, leaning on my friend.

"Well?" I said faintly.

"Patience! patience a while, lad!" he answered.

But, thank Heaven! I had not long to wait. The words were scarcely off
his tongue, when another hand sought mine and shook it wildly; and I
saw Van Tree before me, his face radiant with joy, while a man whom he
had knocked down in his hasty leap from the scaffold was rising beside
me with a good-natured smile. As if at a signal, every face now turned
toward me. A dozen friendly hands passed me up the steps amid a fresh
outburst of cheering. The throng on the scaffold opened somehow, and I
found myself in a second, as it seemed, face to face with the
president of the court. He smiled on me gravely and kindly--what
smiles there seemed to be on all those faces--and held out a paper.

"In the name of the Duke!" he said, speaking in Spanish, in a clear,
loud voice. "A pardon!"

I muttered something, I know not what; nor did it matter, for it was
lost in a burst of cheering. When this was over and silence obtained,
the magistrate continued, "You are required, however, to attend the
Duke at the courthouse. Whither we had better proceed at once."

"I am ready, sir," I muttered.


A road was made for us to descend, and, walking in a kind of beautiful
dream, I passed slowly up the street by the side of the magistrate,
the crowd everywhere willingly standing aside for us. I do not know
whether all those thousands of faces really looked joyfully and kindly
on me as I passed, or whether the deep thankfulness which choked me,
and brought the tears continually to my eyes, transfigured them and
gave them a generous charm not their own. But this I do know: that the
sunshine seemed brighter and the air softer than ever before; that the
clouds trailing across the blue expanse were things of beauty such as
I had never met before; that to draw breath was a joy, and to move,
delight; and that only when the dark valley was left behind did I
comprehend its full gloom--by Heaven's mercy. So may it be with all!

At the door of the court-house, whither numbers of the people had
already run, the press was so great that we came to a standstill, and
were much buffeted about, though in all good humor, before, even with
the aid of the soldiers, we could be got through the throng. When I at
last emerged I found myself again before the table, and saw--but only
dimly, for the light now fell through the stained window directly on
my head--a commanding figure standing behind it. Then a strange thing
happened. A woman passed swiftly round the table, and came to me and
flung her arms round my neck and kissed me. It was the Duchess, and
for a moment she hung upon me, weeping before them all.

"Madam," I said softly, "then it is you who have done this!"

"Ah!" she exclaimed, holding me off from her and looking at me with
eyes which glowed through her tears, "and it was you who did that!"

She drew back from me then, and took me by the hand, and turned
impetuously to the Duke of Cleves, who stood behind smiling at her in
frank amusement. "This," she said, "is the man who gave his life for
my husband, and to whom your highness has given it back."

"Let him tell his tale," the Duke answered gravely. "And do you, my
cousin, sit here beside me."

She left me and walked round the table, and he came forward and placed
her in his own chair amid a great hush of wonder, for she was still
meanly clad, and showed in a hundred places the marks and stains of
travel. Then he stood by her with his hand on the back of the seat. He
was a tall, burly man, with bold, quick-glancing eyes, a flushed face,
and a loud manner; a fierce, blusterous prince, as I have heard. He
was plainly dressed in a leather hunting-suit, and wore huge gauntlets
and brown boots, with a broad-leaved hat pinned up on one side. Yet he
looked a prince.

Somehow I stammered out the tale of the surrender.

"But why? why? why, man?" he asked, when I had finished; "why did you
let them think it was you who wounded the burgher, if it was not?"

"Your highness," I answered, "I had received nothing but good from her
grace, I had eaten her bread and been received into her service.
Besides, it was through my persuasion that we came by the road which
led to this misfortune instead of by another way. Therefore it seemed
to me right that I should suffer, who stood alone and could be
spared--and not her husband."

"It was a great deed!" cried the prince loudly. "I would I had such a
servant. Are you noble, lad?"

I colored high, but not in pain or mortification. The old wound might
reopen, but amid events such as those of this morning it was a slight
matter. "I come of a noble family, may it please your highness," I
answered modestly; "but circumstances prevent me claiming kinship with
it."

He was about, I think, to question me further, when the Duchess looked
up, and said something to him and he something to her. She spoke again
and he answered. Then he nodded assent. "You would fain stand on your
own feet?" he cried to me. "Is that so?"

"It is, sire," I answered.

"Then so be it!" he replied loudly, looking round on the throng with a
frown. "I will ennoble you. You would have died for your lord and
friend, and therefore I give you a rood of land in the common
graveyard of Santon to hold of me, and I name you Von Santonkirch. And
I, William, Duke of Cleves, Julich and Guelders, prince of the Empire,
declare you noble, and give you for your arms three swords of justice;
and the motto you may buy of a clerk! Further, let this decree be
enrolled in my Chancery. Are you satisfied?"


As I dropped on my knees, my eyes sparkling, there was a momentary
disturbance behind me. It was caused by the abrupt entrance of the
Sub-dean. He took in part of the situation at a glance; that is, he
saw me kneeling before the Duke. But he could not see the Duchess of
Suffolk, the Duke's figure being interposed. As he came forward, the
crowd making way for him, he cast an angry glance at me, and scarcely
smoothed his brow even to address the prince. "I am glad that your
highness has not done what was reported to me," he said hastily, his
obeisance brief and perfunctory. "I heard an uproar in the town, and
was told that this man was pardoned."

"It is so!" said the Duke curtly, eying the ecclesiastic with no great
favor. "He is pardoned."

"Only in part, I presume," the priest rejoined urgently. "Or, if
otherwise, I am sure that your highness has not received certain
information with which I can furnish you."

"Furnish away, sir," quoth the Duke, yawning.

"I have had letters from my Lord Bishop of Arras respecting him."

"Respecting him!" exclaimed the prince, starting and bending his brows
in surprise.

"Respecting those in whose company he travels," the priest answered
hastily. "They are represented to me as dangerous persons, pestilent
refugees from England, and obnoxious alike to the Emperor, the Prince
of Spain, and the Queen of England."

"I wonder you do not add also to the King of France and the Soldan of
Turkey!" growled the Duke. "Pish! I am not going to be dictated to by
Master Granvelle--no, nor by his master, be he ten times Emperor! Go
to! Go to! Master Sub-dean! You forget yourself, and so does your
master the Bishop. I will have you know that these people are not what
you think them. Call you my cousin, the widow of the consort of the
late Queen of France, an obnoxious person? Fie! Fie! You forget
yourself!"

He moved as he stopped speaking, so that the astonished churchman
found himself confronted on a sudden by the smiling, defiant Duchess.
The Sub-dean started and his face fell, for, seeing her seated in the
Duke's presence, he discerned at once that the game was played out.
Yet he rallied himself, bethinking him, I fancy, that there were many
spectators. He made a last effort. "The Bishop of Arras----" he began.

"Pish!" scoffed the Duke, interrupting him.

"The Bishop of Arras----" the priest repeated firmly.

"I would he were hung with his own tapestry!" retorted the Duke, with
a brutal laugh.

"Heaven forbid!" replied the ecclesiastic, his pale face reddening and
his eyes darting baleful glances at me. But he took the hint, and
henceforth said no more of the Bishop. Instead, he continued smoothly,
"Your highness has, of course, considered the danger--the danger, I
mean, of provoking neighbors so powerful by shielding this lady and
making her cause your own. You will remember, sir----"

"I will remember Innspruck!" roared the Duke, in a rage, "where the
Emperor, ay, and your everlasting Bishop too, fled before a handful of
Protestants, like sheep before wolves. A fig for your Emperor! I never
feared him young, and I fear him less now that he is old and decrepit
and, as men say, mad. Let him get to his watches, and you to your
prayers. If there were not this table between us, I would pull your
ears, Master Churchman!"

                          *   *   *   *   *

"But tell me," I asked Master Bertie as I stood beside his couch an
hour later, "how did the Duchess manage it? I gathered from something
you or she said, a short time back, that you had no influence with the
Duke of Cleves."

"Not quite that," he answered. "My wife and the late Duke of Suffolk
had much to do with wedding the Prince's sister to King Henry,
thirteen--fourteen years back, is it? And so far we might have felt
confident of his protection. But the marriage turned out ill, or
turned out short, and Queen Anne of Cleves was divorced. And--well, we
felt a little less confident on that account, particularly as he has
the name of a headstrong, passionate man."

"Heaven keep him in it!" I said, smiling. "But you have not told me
yet what happened."

"The Duchess was still asleep this morning, fairly worn out, as you
may suppose, when a great noise awoke her. She got up and went to
Dymphna, and learned it was the Duke's trumpets. Then she went to the
window, and, seeing few people in the streets to welcome him, inquired
why this was. Dymphna broke down at that, and told her what was
happening to you, and that you were to die at that very hour. She went
out straightway, without covering her head,--you know how impetuous
she is,--and flung herself on her knees in the mud before the Duke's
horse as he entered. He knew her, and the rest you can guess."

Can guess? Ah, what happiness it was! Outside, the sun fell hotly on
the steep red roofs, with their rows of casements, and on the sleepy
square, in which knots of people still lingered, talking of the
morning's events. I could see below me the guard which Duke William,
shrewdly mistrusting the Sub-dean, had posted in front of the house,
nominally to do the Duchess honor. I could hear in the next room the
cheerful voices of my friends. What happiness it was to live! What
happiness to be loved! How very, very good and beautiful and glorious
a world, seemed the world to me on that old May morning in that quaint
German town which we had entered so oddly!

As I turned from the window full of thankfulness, my eyes met those of
Mistress Anne, who was sitting on the far side of the sick man's
couch, the baby in a cradle beside her. The risk and exposure of the
last week had made a deeper mark upon her than upon any of us. She was
paler, graver, older, more of a woman and less, much less, of a girl.
And she looked very ill. Her eyes, in particular, seemed to have grown
larger, and as they dwelt on me now there was a strange and solemn
light in them, under which I grew uneasy.

"You have been wonderfully preserved," she said presently, speaking
dreamily, and as much to herself as to me.

"I have, indeed," I answered, thinking she referred only to my escape
of the morning.

But she did not.

"There was, firstly, the time on the river when you were hurt with the
oar," she continued, gazing absently at me, her hands in her lap; "and
then the night when you saw Clarence with Dymphna."

"Or, rather, saw him without her," I interposed, smiling. It was
strange that she should mention it as a fact, when at the time she had
so scolded me for making the statement.

"And then," she continued, disregarding my interruption, "there was
the time when you were stabbed in the passage; and again when you had
the skirmish by the river; and then to-day you were within a minute of
death. You have been wonderfully preserved!"

"I have," I assented thoughtfully. "The more as I suspect that I have
to thank Master Clarence for all these little adventures."

"Strange--very strange!" she muttered, removing her eyes from me that
she might fix them on the floor.

"What is strange?"


The abrupt questioner was the Duchess, who came bustling in at the
moment. "What is strange?" she repeated, with a heightened color and
dancing eyes. "Shall I tell you?" She paused and looked brightly at
me, holding something concealed behind her. I guessed in a moment,
from the aspect of her face, what it was: the letter which I had given
to Master Lindstrom in the morning, and which, with a pardonable
forgetfulness, I had failed to reclaim.

I turned very red. "It was not intended for you now," I said shyly.
For in the letter I had told her my story.

"Pooh! pooh!" she cried. "It is just as I thought. A pretty piece of
folly! No," she continued, as I opened my mouth, "I am not going to
keep your secret, sir. You may go down on your knees. It will be of no
use. Richard, you remember Sir Anthony Cludde of Coton End in
Warwickshire?"

"Oh, yes," her husband said, rising on his elbow, while his face lit
up, and I stood bashfully, shifting my feet.

"I have danced with him a dozen times, years ago!" she continued, her
eyes sparkling with mischief. "Well, sir, this gentleman, Master
Francis Carey, otherwise Von Santonkirch, is Francis Cludde, his
nephew!"

"Sir Anthony's nephew?"

"Yes, and the son of Ferdinand Cludde, whom you also have heard of, of
whom the less----"

She stopped, and turned quickly, interrupted by a half-stifled scream.
It was a scream full of sudden horror and amazement and fear; and it
came from Mistress Anne. The girl had risen, and was gazing at me with
distended eyes and blanched cheeks, and hands stretched out to keep me
off--gazing, indeed, as if she saw in me some awful portent or some
dreadful threat. She did not speak, but she began, without taking her
eyes from me, to retreat toward the door.

"Hoity toity!" cried my lady, stamping her foot in anger. "What has
happened to the girl? What----"

What, indeed? The Duchess stopped, still more astonished. For, without
uttering a word of explanation or apology, Mistress Anne had reached
the door, groped blindly for the latch, found it, and gone out, her
eyes, with the same haunted look of horror in them, fixed on me to the
last.




                            CHAPTER XVII.

                   A LETTER THAT HAD MANY ESCAPES.


"Hoity, toity!" the Duchess cried again, looking from one to another
of us when Anne had disappeared. "What has come to the little fool?
Has she gone crazy?"

I shook my head, too completely at sea even to hazard a conjecture.
Master Bertie shook his head also, keeping his eyes glued to the door,
as if he could not believe Anne had really gone.

"I said nothing to frighten her!" my lady protested.

"Nothing at all," I answered. For how should the announcement that my
real name was Cludde terrify Mistress Anne Brandon nearly out of her
senses?

"Well, no," Master Bertie agreed, his thoughtful face more thoughtful
than usual; "so far as I heard, you said nothing. But I think, my
dear, that you had better follow her and learn what it is. She must be
ill."

The Duchess sat down. "I will go by-and-by," she said coolly, at which
I was not much surprised, for I have always remarked that women have
less sympathy with other women's ailments, especially of the nerves,
than have men.

"For the moment I want to scold this brave, silly boy here!" she
continued, looking so kindly at me that I blushed again, and forgot
all about Mistress Anne. "To think of him leaving his home to become a
wandering squire of dames merely because his father was a--well, not
quite what he would have liked him to be! I remember something about
him," she continued, pursing up her lips, and nodding her head at us.
"I fancied him dead, however, years ago. But there! if every one whose
father were not quite to his liking left home and went astraying,
Master Francis, all sensible folk would turn innkeepers, and make
their fortunes."

"It was not only that which drove me from home," I explained. "The
Bishop of Winchester gave me clearly to understand----"

"That Coton was not the place for you!" exclaimed my lady scornfully.
"He is a sort of connection of yours, is he not? Oh, I know. And he
thinks he has a kind of reversionary interest in the property! With
you and your father out of the way, and only your girl cousin left,
his interest is much more likely to come to hand. Do you see?"

I recalled what Martin Luther had said about the cuckoo. But I have
since thought that probably they both wronged Stephen Gardiner in
this. He was not a man of petty mind, and his estate was equal to his
high place. I think it more likely that his motive in removing me from
Coton was chiefly the desire to use my services abroad, in conjunction
perhaps with some remoter and darker plan for eventually devoting the
Cludde property to the Church. Such an act of piety would have been
possible had Sir Anthony died leaving his daughter unmarried, and
would certainly have earned for the Chancellor Queen Mary's lasting
favor. I think it the more likely to have been in his mind because his
inability to persuade the gentry to such acts of restitution--King
Harry had much enriched us--was always a sore point with the Queen,
and more than once exposed him to her resentment.

"The strangest thing of all," the Duchess continued with alacrity,
"seems to me to be this: that if he had not meddled with you, he would
not have had his plans in regard to us thwarted. If he had not driven
you from home, you would never have helped me to escape from London,
nor been with us to foil his agents."

"A higher power than the Chancellor arranged that!" said Master Bertie
emphatically.

"Well, at any rate, I am glad that you are you!" the Duchess answered,
rising gayly. "A Cludde? Why, one feels at home again. And yet," she
continued, her lips trembling suddenly, and her eyes filling with
tears as she looked at me, "there was never house raised yet on nobler
deed than yours."

"Go! go! go!" cried her husband, seeing my embarrassment. "Go and look
to that foolish girl!"

"I will! Yet stop!" cried my lady, pausing when she was half way
across the floor, and returning, "I was forgetting that I have another
letter to open. It is very odd that this letter was never opened
before," she continued, producing that which had lain in my haversack.
"It has had several narrow escapes. But this time I vow I will see
inside it. You give me leave?"

"Oh, yes," I said, smiling. "I wash my hands of it. Whoever the
Mistress Clarence to whom it is addressed may be, it is enough that
her name is Clarence! We have suffered too much at his hands."

"I open it, then!" my lady cried dramatically. I nodded. She took her
husband's dagger and cut the green silk which bound the packet, and
opened and read.

Only a few words. Then she stopped, and looking off the paper,
shivered. "I do not understand this," she murmured. "What does it
mean?"

"No good! I'll be sworn!" Master Bertie replied, gazing at her
eagerly. "Read it aloud, Katherine."


"'To Mistress A---- B----. I am advertised by my trusty agent, Master
Clarence, that he hath benefited much by your aid in the matter in
which I have employed him. Such service goeth always for much, and
never for naught, with me. In which belief confirm yourself. For the
present, working with him as heretofore, be secret, and on no account
let your true sentiments come to light. So you will be the more
valuable to me, even as it is more easy to unfasten a barred door from
within than from without.'"


Here the Duchess broke off abruptly, and turned on us a face full of
wonder. "What does it mean?" she asked.

"Is that all?" her husband said.

"Not quite," she answered, returning to it, and reading:

"'Those whom you have hitherto served have too long made a mockery of
sacred things, but their cup is full and the business of seeing that
they drink it lieth with me, who am not wont to be slothful in these
matters. Be faithful and secret. Good speed and fare you well.--Ste.
Winton."

"One thing is quite clear!" said Master Bertie slowly. "That you and I
are the persons whose cup is full. You remember how you once dressed
up a dog in a rochet, and dandled it before Gardiner? And it is our
matter in which Clarence is employed. Then who is it who has been
cooperating with him, and whose aid is of so much value to him?"

"'Even as it is easier,'" I muttered thoughtfully, "'to unfasten a
barred door from within than from without." What was it of which that
strange sentence reminded me? Ha! I had it. Of the night on which we
had fled from Master Lindstrom's house, when Mistress Anne had been
seized with that odd fit of perverseness, and had almost opened the
door looking upon the river in spite of all I could say or do. It was
of that the sentence reminded me. "To whom is it addressed?" I asked
abruptly.

"To Mistress Clarence," my lady answered.

"No; inside, I mean."

"Oh! to Mistress A---- B----. But that gives us no clew," she added.
"It is a disguise. You see they are the two first letters of the
alphabet."

So they were. And the initial letters of Anne Brandon! I wondered that
the Duchess did not see it, that she did not at once turn her
suspicions toward the right quarter. But she was, for a woman,
singularly truthful and confiding. And she saw nothing.

I looked at Master Bertie. He seemed puzzled, discerning, I fancy,
how strangely the allusions pointed to Mistress Anne, but not daring
at once to draw the inference. She was his wife's kinswoman by
marriage--albeit a distant one--and much indebted to her. She had been
almost as his own sister. She was young and fair, and to associate
treachery and ingratitude such as this with her seemed almost too
horrible.

Then why was I so clear sighted as to read the riddle? Why was I the
first to see the truth? Because I had felt for days a vague and
ill-defined distrust of the girl. I had seen more of her odd fits and
caprices than had the others. Looking back now I could find a
confirmation of my idea in a dozen things which had befallen us. I
remembered how ill and stricken she had looked on the day when I had
first brought out the letter, and how strangely she had talked to me
about it. I remembered Clarence's interview with, not Dymphna,--as I
had then thought,--but, as I now guessed, Anne, wearing her cloak. I
recalled the manner in which she had used me to persuade Master Bertie
to take the Wesel instead of the Santon road; no doubt she had told
Clarence to follow in that direction, if by any chance we escaped
him on the island. And her despair when she heard in the church porch
that I had killed Clarence at the ford! And her utter abandonment to
fear--poor guilty thing!--when she thought that all her devices had
only led her with us to a dreadful death! These things, in the light
in which I now viewed them, were cogent evidences against her.

"It must have been written to some one about us!" said the Duchess at
length. "To some one in our confidence. 'On our side of the door,' as
he calls it."

"Yes, that is certain," I said.

"And on the wrapper he styles her Mistress Clarence. Now who----"

"Who could it have been? That is the question we have to answer,"
Master Bertie replied dryly. Hearing his voice, I knew he had come at
last to the same conclusion to which I had jumped. "I think you may
dismiss the servants from the inquiry," he continued. "The Bishop of
Winchester would scarcely write to them in that style."

"Dismiss the servants? Then who is left?" she protested.

"I think----" He lost courage, hesitated, and broke off. She looked at
him wonderingly. He turned to me, and, gaining confirmation from my
nod, began again. "I think I should ask A---- B----," he said.

"A---- B----?" she cried, still not seeing one whit.

"Yes. Anne Brandon," he answered sternly.

She repeated his words softly and stood a moment gazing at him. In
that moment she saw it all. She sat down suddenly on the chair beside
her and shuddered violently, as if she had laid her hand unwittingly
upon a snake. "Oh, Richard," she whispered, "it is too horrible!"

"I fear it is too true," he answered gloomily.

I shrank from looking at them, from meeting her eyes or his. I felt as
if this shame had come upon us all. The thought that the culprit might
walk into the room at any moment filled me with terror. I turned away
and looked through the window, leaving the husband and wife together.

"Is it only the name you are thinking of?" she muttered.

"No," he answered. "Before I left England to go to Calais I saw
something pass between them--between her and Clarence--which,
surprised me. Only in the confusion of those last days it slipped from
my memory for the time."

"I see," she said quietly. "The villain!"


Looking back on the events of the last week, I found many things made
plain by the lurid light now cast upon them. I understood how Master
Lindstrom's vase had come to be broken when we were discussing the
letter, which in my hands must have been a perpetual terror to the
girl. I discerned that she had purposely sown dissension between
myself and Van Tree, and recalled how she had striven to persuade us
not to leave the island; then, how she had induced us to take that
unlucky road; finally, how on the road her horse had lagged and lagged
behind, detaining us all when every minute was precious. The things
all dovetailed into one another; each by itself was weak, but together
they formed a strong scaffold--a scaffold strong enough for the
hanging of a man, if she had been a man! The others appealed to me,
the Duchess feverishly anxious to be assured one way or the other. The
very suspicion of the existence of such treachery at her side seemed
to stifle her. Still looking out of the window I detailed the proofs I
have mentioned, not gladly, Heaven knows, or in any spirit of revenge.
But my duty was rather to my companions who had been true to me, than
to her. I told them the truth as far as I knew it. The whole wretched,
miserable truth was only to become known to me later.


"I will go to her," the Duchess said presently, rising from her seat.

"My dear!" her husband cried. He stretched out his hand, and grasping
her skirt detained her. "You will not----"

"Do not be afraid!" she replied sadly, as she stooped over him and
kissed his forehead. "It is a thing past scolding, Richard; past love
and even hope, and all but past pity. I will be merciful as we hope
for mercy, but she can never be friend of ours again, and some one
must tell her. I will do so and return. As for that man!" she
continued, obscuring suddenly the fair and noble side of her character
which she had just exhibited, and which I confess had surprised me,
for I had not thought her capable of a generosity so uncommon; "as for
that man," she repeated, drawing herself up to her full height, while
her eyes sparkled and her cheek grew red, "who has turned her into a
vile schemer and a shameless hypocrite, as he would fain have turned
better women, I will show him no mercy nor grace if I ever have him
under my feet. I will crush him as I would an adder, though I be
crushed next moment myself!"

She was sweeping with that word from the room, and had nearly reached
the door before I found my voice. Then I called out "Stay!" just in
time. "You will do no good, madam, by going!" I said, rising. "You
will not find her. She is gone."

"Gone?"

"Yes," I said quietly. "She left the house twenty minutes ago. I saw
her cross the market-place, wearing her cloak and carrying a bag. I do
not think she will return."

"Not return? But whither has she gone?" they both cried at once.

I shook my head.

"I can only guess," I said in a low voice. "I saw no more than I have
told you."

"But why did you not tell me'" the Duchess cried reproachfully. "She
shall be brought back."

"It would be useless," Master Bertie answered. "Yet I doubt if it be
as Carey thinks. Why should she go just at this time? She does not
know that she is found out. She does not know that this letter has
been recovered. Not a word, mind, was said of it before she left the
room."

"No," I allowed; "that is true."

I was puzzled on this point myself, now I came to consider it. I could
not see why she had taken the alarm so opportunely; but I maintained
my opinion nevertheless.

"Something frightened her," I said; "though it may not have been the
letter."

"Yes," said the Duchess, after a moment's silence. "I suppose you are
right. I suppose something frightened her, as you say. I wonder what
it was, poor wretch!"


It turned out that I was right. Mistress Anne had gone indeed, having
stayed, so far as we could learn from an examination of the room which
she had shared with Dymphna, merely to put together the few things
which our adventures had left her. She had gone out from among us in
this foreign land without a word of farewell, without a good wish
given or received, without a soul to say God speed! The thought made
me tremble. If she had died it would have been different. Now, to feel
sorrow for her as for one who had been with us in heart as well as in
body, seemed a mockery. How could we grieve for one who had moved day
by day and hour by hour among us, only that with each hour and day she
might plot and scheme and plan our destruction? It was impossible!

We made inquiries indeed, but without result; and so, abruptly and
terribly she passed--for the time--out of our knowledge, though often
afterward I recalled sadly the weary, hunted look which I had
sometimes seen in her eyes when she sat listless and dreamy. Poor
girl! Her own acts had placed her, as the Duchess said, beyond love or
hope, but not beyond pity.

So it is in life. The day which sees one's trial end sees another's
begin. We--the Duchess and her child, Master Bertie and I--stayed with
our good and faithful friends the Lindstroms a while, resting and
recruiting our strength; and during this interval, at the pressing
instance of the Duchess, I wrote letters to Sir Anthony and
Petronilla, stating that I was abroad, and was well, and looked
presently to return; but not disclosing my refuge or the names of my
companions. At the end of five days, Master Bertie being fairly strong
again and Santon being considered unsafe for us as a permanent
residence, we went under guard to Wesel, where we were received as
people of quality, and lodged, there being no fitting place, in the
disused church of St. Willibrod. Here the child was christened
Peregrine--a wanderer; the governor of the city and I being
godfathers. And here we lived in peace--albeit with hearts that
yearned for home--for some months.

During this time two pieces of news came to us from England: one, that
the Parliament, though much pressed to it, had refused to acquiesce in
the confiscation of the Duchess's estates; the other, that our joint
persecutor, the great Bishop of Winchester, was dead. This last we at
first disbelieved. It was true, nevertheless. Stephen Gardiner, whose
vast schemes had enmeshed people so far apart in station, and indeed
in all else, as the Duchess and myself, was dead at last; had died
toward the end of 1555, at the height of his power, with England at
his feet, and gone to his Maker. I have known many worse men.

We trusted that this might open the way for our return, but we found
on the contrary that fresh clouds were rising. The persecution of the
Reformers, which Queen Mary had begun in England, was carried on with
increasing rigor, and her husband, who was now King of Spain and
master of the Netherlands, freed from the prudent checks of his
father, was inclined to pleasure her in this by giving what aid he
could abroad. His Minister in the Netherlands, the Bishop of Arras,
brought so much pressure to bear upon our protector to induce him to
give us up, that it was plain the Duke of Cleves must sooner or later
comply. We thought it better, therefore, to remove ourselves, and
presently did so, going to the town of Winnheim in the Rhine
Palatinate.

We found ourselves not much more secure here, however, and all our
efforts to discover a safe road into France failing, and the stock of
money which the Duchess had provided beginning to give out, we were in
great straits whither to go or what to do.

At this time of our need, however, Providence opened a door in a
quarter where we least looked for it. Letters came from Sigismund, the
King of Poland, and from the Palatine of Wilna in that country,
inviting the Duchess and Master Bertie to take up their residence
there, and offering the latter an establishment and honorable
employment. The overture was unlooked for, and was not accepted
without misgivings, Wilna being so far distant, and there being none
of our race in that country. However, assurance of the Polish King's
good faith reached us--I say us, for in all their plans I was
included--through John Alasco, a nobleman who had visited England. And
in due time we started on this prodigious journey, and came safely to
Wilna, where our reception was such as the letters had led us to
expect.


I do not propose to set down here our adventures, though they were
many, in that strange country of frozen marshes and endless plains,
but to pass over eighteen months which I spent not without profit to
myself in the Pole's service, seeing something of war in his
Lithuanian campaigns, and learning much of men and the world, which
here, to say nothing of wolves and bears, bore certain aspects not
commonly visible in Warwickshire. I pass on to the early autumn of
1558, when a letter from the Duchess, who was at Wilna, was brought to
me at Cracovy. It was to this effect:

"Dear Friend: Send you good speed! Word has come to us here of an
enterprise Englandward, which promises, if it be truly reported to us,
to so alter things at home that there may be room for us at our own
firesides. Heaven so further it, both for our happiness and the good
of the religion. Master Bertie has embarked on it, and I have taken
upon myself to answer for your aid and counsel, which have never been
wanting to us. Wherefore, dear friend, come, sparing neither horse nor
spurs, nor anything which may bring you sooner to Wilna, and your
assured and loving friend, Katherine Suffolk."


In five days after receiving this I was at Wilna, and two months later
I saw England again, after an absence of three years. Early in
November, 1558, Master Bertie and I landed at Lowestoft, having made
the passage from Hamburg in a trading vessel of that place. We stopped
only to sleep one night, and then, dressed as traveling merchants, we
set out on the road to London, entering the city without accident or
hindrance on the third day after landing.




                            CHAPTER XVIII.

                         THE WITCH'S WARNING.


"One minute!" I said. "That is the place."

Master Bertie turned in his saddle, and looked at it. The light was
fading into the early dusk of a November evening, but the main
features of four cross streets, the angle between two of them filled
by the tall belfry of a church, were still to be made out. The east
wind had driven loiterers indoors, and there was scarcely any one
abroad to notice us. I pointed to a dead wall ten paces down one
street. "Opposite that they stopped," I said. "There was a pile of
boards leaning against it then."

"You have had many a worse bedchamber since, lad," he said, smiling.

"Many," I answered. And then by a common impulse we shook up the
horses, and trotting gently on were soon clear of London and making
for Islington. Passing through the latter we began to breast the steep
slope which leads to Highgate, and coming, when we had reached the
summit, plump upon the lights of the village, pulled up in front of a
building which loomed darkly across the road.

"This is the Gatehouse Tavern," Master Bertie said in a low voice. "We
shall soon know whether we have come on a fool's errand--or worse!"

We rode under the archway into a great courtyard, from which the road
issued again on the other side through another gate. In one corner two
men were littering down a line of packhorses by the light of the
lanterns, which brought their tanned and rugged faces into relief. In
another, where the light poured ruddily from an open doorway, an
ostler was serving out fodder, and doing so, if we might judge from
the travelers' remonstrances, with a niggardly hand. From the windows
of the house a dozen rays of light shot athwart the darkness, and
disclosed as many pigs wallowing asleep in the middle of the yard. In
all we saw a coarse comfort and welcome. Master Bertie led the way
across the yard, and accosted the ostler. "Can we have stalls and
beds?" he asked.

The man stayed his chaffering, and looked up at us. "Every man to his
business," he replied gruffly. "Stalls, yes; but of beds I know
nothing. For women's work go to the women."

"Right!" said I, "so we will. With better luck than you would go, I
expect, my man!"

Bursting into a hoarse laugh at this--he was lame and one-eyed and not
very well-favored--he led us into a long, many-stalled stable, feebly
lit by lanterns which here and there glimmered against the walls.
"Suit yourselves," he said; "first come is first served here."

He seemed an ill-conditioned fellow, but the businesslike way in which
we went about our work, watering, feeding, and littering down in old
campaigners' fashion, drew from him a grunt of commendation. "Have you
come from far, masters?" he asked.

"No, from London," I answered curtly. "We come as linen-drapers from
Westcheap, if you want to know."

"Ay, I see that," he said chuckling. "Never were atop of a horse
before nor handled anything but a clothyard; oh, no!"

"We want a merchant reputed to sell French lace," I continued, looking
hard at him. "Do you happen to know if there is a dealer here with
any?"

He nodded rather to himself than to me, as if he had expected the
question. Then in the same tone, but with a quick glance of
intelligence, he answered, "I will show you into the house presently,
and you can see for yourselves. A stable is no place for French lace."
He pointed with a wink over his shoulder toward a stall in which a
man, apparently drunk, lay snoring. "That is a fine toy!" he ran on
carelessly, as I removed my dagger from the holster and concealed it
under my cloak--"a fine plaything--for a linen draper!"

"Peace, peace, man! and show us in," said Master Bertie impatiently.

With a shrug of his shoulders the man obeyed. Crossing the courtyard
behind him, we entered the great kitchen, which, full of light
and warmth and noise, presented just such a scene of comfort and
bustle, of loud talking, red-faced guests, and hurrying bare-armed
serving-maids, as I remembered lighting upon at St. Albans three years
back. But I had changed much since then, and seen much. The bailiff
himself would hardly have recognized his old antagonist in the tall,
heavily cloaked stranger, whose assured air, acquired amid wild
surroundings in a foreign land, gave him a look of age to which I
could not fairly lay claim. Master Bertie had assigned the lead to me
as being in less danger of recognition, and I followed the ostler
toward the hearth without hesitation. "Master Jenkin!" the man cried,
with the same rough bluntness he had shown without, "here are two
travelers want the lace-seller who was here to-day. Has he gone?"

"Who gone?" retorted the host as loudly.

"The lace merchant who came this morning."

"No; he is in No. 32," returned the landlord. "Will you sup first,
gentlemen?"

We declined, and followed the ostler, who made no secret of our
destination, telling those in our road to make way, as the gentlemen
were for No. 32. One of the crowd, however, who seemed to be crossing
from the lower end of the room, failed apparently to understand, and,
interposing between us and our guide, brought me perforce to a halt.

"By your leave, good woman!" I said, and turned to pass round her.

But she foiled me with unexpected nimbleness, and I could not push her
aside, she was so very old. Her gums were toothless and her forehead
was lined and wrinkled. About her eyes, which under hideous red lids
still shone with an evil gleam--a kind of reflection of a wicked
past--a thousand crows' feet had gathered. A few wisps of gray hair
struggled from under the handkerchief which covered her head. She was
humpbacked, and stooped over a stick, and whether she saw or not my
movement of repugnance, her voice was harsh when she spoke.

"Young gentleman," she croaked, "let me tell your fortune by the
stars. A fortune for a groat, young gentleman!" she continued, peering
up into my face and frustrating my attempts to pass.

"Here is a groat," I answered peevishly, "and for the fortune, I will
hear it another day. So let us by!"

But she would not. My companion, seeing that the attention of the room
was being drawn to us, tried to pull me by her. But I could not use
force, and short of force there was no remedy. The ostler, indeed,
would have interfered on our behalf, and returned to bid her, with a
civility he had not bestowed on us, "give us passage." But she swiftly
turned her eyes on him in a sinister fashion, and he retreated with an
oath and a paling face, while those nearest to us--and half a dozen
had crowded round--drew back, and crossed themselves in haste almost
ludicrous.

"Let me see your face, young gentleman," she persisted, with a hollow
cough. "My eyes are not so clear as they were, or it is not your cloak
and your flap-hat that would blind me."

Thinking it best to get rid of her, even at a slight risk--and the
chance that among the travelers present there would be one able to
recognize me was small indeed--I uncovered. She shot a piercing glance
at my face, and looking down on the floor, traced hurriedly a figure
with her stick. She studied the phantom lines a moment, and then
looked up.

"Listen!" she said solemnly, and waving her stick round me, she
quavered out in tones which filled me with a strange tremor:


      "The man goes east, and the wind blows west,
       Wood to the head, and steel to the breast!
       The man goes west, and the wind blows east,
       The neck twice doomed the gallows shall feast!


"Beware!" she went on more loudly, and harshly, tapping with her stick
on the floor, and snaking her palsied head at me. "Beware, unlucky
shoot of a crooked branch! Go no farther with it! Go back! The sword
may miss or may not fall, but the cord is sure!"

If Master Bertie had not held my arm tightly, I should have recoiled,
as most of those within hearing had already done. The strange
allusions to my past, which I had no difficulty in detecting, and the
witch's knowledge of the risks of our present enterprise, were enough
to startle and shake the most constant mind; and in the midst of
enterprises secret and dangerous, few minds are so firm or so reckless
as to disdain omens. That she was one of those unhappy beings who buy
dark secrets at the expense of their souls, seemed certain; and had I
been alone, I should have, I am not ashamed to say it, given back.

But I was lucky in having for my companion a man of rare mind, and
besides of so single a religious belief that to the end of his life he
always refused to put faith in a thing of the existence of which I
have no doubt myself--I mean witchcraft.

He showed at this moment the courage of his opinions. "Peace, peace,
woman!" he said compassionately. "We shall live while God wills it,
and die when he wills it. And neither live longer nor die earlier! So
let us by."

"Would you perish?" she quavered.

"Ay! If so God wills," he answered undaunted.

At that she seemed to shake all over, and hobbled aside, muttering,
"Then go on! Go on! God wills it!"

Master Bertie gave me no time for hesitation, but, holding my arm,
urged me on to where the ostler stood awaiting the event with a face
of much discomposure. He opened the door for us, however, and led the
way up a narrow and not too clean staircase. On the landing at the
head of this he paused, and raised his lantern so as to cast the light
on our faces. "She has overlooked me, the old witch!" he said
viciously; "I wish I had never meddled in this business."

"Man!" Master Bertie replied sternly; "do you fear that weak old
woman?"

"No; but I fear her master," retorted the ostler, "and that is the
devil!"

"Then I do not," Master Bertie answered bravely. "For my Master is as
good a match for him as I am for that old woman. When he wills it,
man, you will die, and not before. So pluck up spirit."

Master Bertie did not look at me, though I needed his encouragement as
much as the ostler, having had better proofs of the woman's strange
knowledge. But, seeing that his exhortation had emboldened this
ignorant man, I was ashamed to seem to hesitate. When the ostler
knocked at the door--not of 32, but of 15--and it presently opened, I
went in without more ado.

The room was a bare inn-chamber. A pallet without coverings lay in one
corner. In the middle were a couple of stools, and on one of them a
taper.

The person who had opened to us stood eying us attentively; a bluff,
weather-beaten man with a thick beard and the air of a sailor. "Well,"
he said, "what now?"

"These gentlemen want to buy some lace," the ostler explained.

"What lace do they want?" was the retort.

"French lace," I answered.

"You have come to the right shop, then," the man answered briskly.
Nodding to our conductor to depart, he carefully let him out. Then,
barring the door behind him, he as rapidly strode to the pallet and
twitched it aside, disclosing a trap door. He lifted this, and we saw
a narrow shaft descending into darkness. He brought the taper and held
it so as to throw a faint light into the opening. There was no ladder,
but blocks of wood nailed alternately against two of the sides, at
intervals of a couple of feet or so, made the descent pretty easy for
an active man. "The door is on this side," he said, pointing out the
one. "Knock loudly once and softly twice. The word is the same."

We nodded and while he held the taper above, we descended, one by one,
without much difficulty, though I admit that half-way down the old
woman's words "Go on and perish" came back disquietingly to my mind.
However, my foot struck the bottom before I had time to digest them,
and a streak of light which seemed to issue from under a door forced
my thoughts the next moment into a new channel. Whispering to Master
Bertie to pause a minute, for there was only room for one of us to
stand at the bottom of the shaft, I knocked in the fashion prescribed.

The sound of loud voices, which I had already detected, ceased on a
sudden, and I heard a shuffling on the other side of the boards. This
was followed by silence, and then the door was flung open, and,
blinded for the moment by a blaze of light, I walked mechanically
forward into a room. I made out as I advanced a group of men standing
round a rude table, their figures thrown into dark relief by flares
stuck in sconces on the walls behind them. Some had weapons in their
hands and others had partly risen from their seats and stood in
postures of surprise. "What do you seek?" cried a threatening voice
from among them.

"Lace," I answered.

"What lace?"

"French lace."

"Then you are welcome--heartily welcome!" was the answer given in a
tone of relief. "But who comes with you?"

"Master Richard Bertie, of Lincolnshire," I answered promptly; and at
that moment he emerged from the shaft.

A still more hearty murmur of welcome hailed his name and appearance,
and we were borne forward to the table amid a chorus of voices, the
greeting given to Master Bertie being that of men who joyfully hail
unlooked-for help. The room, from its vaulted ceiling and stone floor,
and the trams of casks which lay here and there or near the table
serving for seats, appeared to be a cellar. Its dark, gloomy recesses,
the flaring lights, and the weapons on the table, seemed meet and
fitting surroundings for the anxious faces which were gathered about
the board; for there was a something in the air which was not so much
secrecy as a thing more unpleasant--suspicion and mistrust. Almost at
the moment of our entrance it showed itself. One of the men, before
the door had well closed behind us, went toward it, as if to go out.
The leader--he who had questioned me--called sharply to him, bidding
him come back. And he came back, but reluctantly, as it seemed to me.

I barely noticed this, for Master Bertie, who was known personally to
many and by name to all, was introducing me to two who were apparently
the leaders: Sir Thomas Penruddocke, a fair man as tall as myself,
loose-limbed and untidily dressed, with a reckless eye and a loud
tongue; and Master Walter Kingston, a younger brother, I was told, of
that Sir Anthony Kingston who had suffered death the year before for
conspiracy against the queen--the same in which Lord Devon had showed
the white feather. Kingston was a young man of moderate height and
slender; of a brown complexion, and delicate, almost womanish beauty,
his sleepy dark eyes and dainty mustache suggesting a temper rather
amiable than firm. But the spirit of revenge had entered into him, and
I soon learned that not even Penruddocke, a Cornish knight of longer
lineage than purse, was so vehement a plotter or so devoted to the
cause. Looking at the others my heart sank; it needed no greater
experience than mine to discern that, except three or four whom I
identified as stout professors of religion, they were men rather of
desperate fortunes than good estate. I learned on the instant that
conspiracy makes strange bedfellows, and that it is impossible to do
dirty work even with the purest intentions--in good company! Master
Bertie's face indicated to one who knew him as well as I did something
of the same feeling; and could the clock have been put back awhile,
and we placed with free hands and uncommitted outside the Gatehouse, I
think we should with one accord have turned our backs on it, and given
up an attempt which in this company could scarcely fare any way but
ill. Still, for good or evil, the die was cast now, and retreat was
out of the question.

We had confronted too many dangers during the last three years not to
be able to face this one with a good courage; and presently Master
Bertie, taking a seat, requested to be told of the strength and plans
of our associates, his businesslike manner introducing at once some
degree of order and method into a conference which before our arrival
had--unless I was much mistaken--been conspicuously lacking in both.

"Our resources?" Penruddocke replied confidently. "They lie
everywhere, man! We have but to raise the flag and the rest will be a
triumphal march. The people, sick of burnings and torturings, and
heated by the loss of Calais last January, will flock to us. Flock to
us, do I say? I will answer for it they will!"

"But you have some engagements, some promises from people of
standing?"

"Oh, yes! But the whole nation will join us. They are weary of the
present state of things."

"They may be as weary of it as you say," Master Bertie answered
shrewdly; "but is it equally certain that they will risk their necks
to amend it? You have fixed upon some secure base from which we can
act, and upon which, if necessary, we may fall back to concentrate our
strength?"

"Fall back?" cried Penruddocke, rising from his seat in heat. "Master
Bertie, I hope you have not come among us to talk of falling back! Let
us have no talk of that. If Wyatt had held on at once London would
have been his! It was falling back ruined him."

Master Bertie shook his head. "If you have no secure base, you run the
risk of being crushed in the first half hour," he said. "When a fire
is first lighted the breeze puts it out which afterward but fans it."

"You will not say that when you hear our plans. There are to be three
risings at once. Lord Delaware will rise in the west."

"But will he?" said Master Bertie pointedly, disregarding the
threatening looks which were cast at him by more than one. "The late
rebellion there was put down very summarily, and I should have thought
that countryside would not be prone to rise again. _Will_ Lord
Delaware rise?"

"Oh, yes, he will rise fast enough!" Penruddocke replied carelessly.
"I will answer for him. And on the same day, while we do the London
business, Sir Richard Bray will gather his men in Kent."

"Do not count on him!" said Master Bertie. "A prisoner, muffled and
hoodwinked, was taken to the Tower by water this afternoon. And rumor
says it was Sir Richard Bray."

There was a pause of consternation, during which one looked at
another, and swarthy faces grew pale. Penruddocke was the first to
recover himself. "Bah!" he exclaimed, "a fig for rumor! She is ever a
lying jade! I will bet a noble Richard Bray is supping in his own
house at this minute."

"Then you would lose," Master Bertie rejoined sadly, and with no show
of triumph. "On hearing the report I sent a messenger to Sir Richard's
house. He brought word back that Sir Richard Bray had been fetched
away unexpectedly by four men, and that the house was in confusion."

A murmur of dismay broke out at the lower end of the table. But the
Cornishman rose to the situation. "What matter?" he cried
boisterously. "What we have lost in Bray we have gained in Master
Bertie. He will raise Lincolnshire for us, and the Duchess's tenants.
There should be five hundred stout men of the latter, and two-thirds
of them Protestants at heart. If Bray has been seized there is the
more call for haste that we may release him."

This appeal was answered by an outburst of cries. One or two even
rose, and waving their weapons swore a speedy vengeance. But Master
Bertie sat silent until the noise had subsided. Then he spoke. "You
must not count on them either, Sir Thomas," he said firmly. "I cannot
find it in my conscience to bring my wife's tenants into a plan so
desperate as this appears to be. To appeal to the people generally is
one thing; to call on those who are bound to us and who cannot in
honor refuse is another. And I will not risk in a hopeless struggle
the lives of men whose fathers looked for guidance to me and mine."

A silence, the silence of utter astonishment, fell upon the plotters
round the table. In every face--and they were all turned upon my
companion--I read rage and distrust and dismay. They had chafed under
his cold criticisms and his calm reasonings. But this went beyond all,
and there were hands which stole instinctively to daggers, and eyes
which waited scowling for a signal. But Penruddocke, sanguine by
nature and rendered reckless by circumstances, had still the feelings
of a gentleman, and something in him responded to the appeal which
underlay Master Bertie's words. He remained silent, gazing gloomily at
the table, his eyes perhaps opened at this late hour to the
hopelessness of the attempt he meditated.

It was Walter Kingston who came to the fore, and put into words the
thoughts of the coarser and more selfish spirits round him. Leaping
from his seat he dashed his slender hand on the table. "What does this
mean?" he sneered, a dangerous light in his dark eyes. "Those only are
here or should be here who are willing to stake all--all, mind you--on
the cause. Let us have no sneaks! Let us have no men with a foot on
either bank! Let us have no Courtenays nor cowards! Such men ruined
Wyatt and hanged my brother! A curse on them!" he cried, his voice
rising almost to a scream.

"Master Kingston! do you refer to me?" Bertie rejoined in haughty
surprise.

"Ay, I do!" cried the young man hotly.

"Then I must beg leave of these gentlemen to explain my position."

"Your position? So! More words?" quoth the other mockingly.

"Ay! as many words as I please," retorted Master Bertie, his color
rising. "Afterward I will be as ready with deeds, I dare swear, as any
other! My tenants and my wife's I will not draw into an almost
hopeless struggle. But my own life and my friend's, since we have
obtained your secrets, I must risk, and I will do so in honor to the
death. For the rest, who doubts my courage may test it below ground or
above."

The young man laughed rudely. "You will risk your life, but not your
lands, Master Bertie? That is the position, is it?"

My companion was about to utter a rejoinder, fierce for him, when I,
who had hitherto sat silent, interposed. "The old witch told the
truth," I cried bitterly. "She said if we came hither we should
perish. And perish we shall, through being linked to a dozen men as
brave as I could wish, but the biggest fools under heaven!"

"Fools?" shouted Kingston.

"Ay, fools!" I repeated. "For who but fools, being at sea in a boat in
which all must sink or swim, would fall a-quarreling? Tell me that!" I
cried, slapping the table.

"You are about right," Penruddocke said, and half a dozen voices
muttered assent.

"About right, is he?" shrieked Kingston. "But who knows we are in a
boat together? Who knows that, I'd like to hear?"

"I do!" I said, standing up and overtopping him by eight inches. "And
if any man hints that Master Bertie is here for any other purpose or
with any other intent than to honestly risk his life in this endeavor
as becomes a gentleman, let him stand out--let him stand out, and I
will break his neck! Fie, gentlemen, fie!" I continued, after a short
pause, which I did not make too long lest Master Kingston's passion
should get the better of his prudence. "Though I am young I have seen
service. But I never saw battle won yet with dissension in the camp.
For shame! Let us to business, and make the best dispositions we may."

"You talk sense, Master Carey!" Penruddocke cried, with a great oath.
"Give me your hand. And do you, Kingston, hold your peace. If Master
Bertie will not raise his men to save his own skin, he will hardly do
it for ours. Now, Sir Richard Bray being taken, what is to be done, my
lads? Come, let us look to that."

So the storm blew over. But it was with heavy hearts that two of us
fell to the discussion which followed, counting over weapons and
assigning posts, and debating this one's fidelity and that one's
lukewarmness. Our first impressions had not deceived us. The
plot was desperate, and those engaged in it were wanting in every
element which should command success--in information, forethought,
arrangement--everything save sheer audacity. When after a prolonged
and miserable sitting it was proposed that all should take the oath of
association on the Gospels, Master Bertie and I assented gloomily. It
would make our position no worse, for already we were fully committed.
The position was indeed bad enough. We had only persuaded the others
to a short delay; and even this meant that we must remain in hiding in
England, exposed from day to day to all the chances of detection and
treachery.

Sir Thomas brought out from some secret place about him a tiny roll of
paper wrapped in a quill, and while we stood about him looking over
his shoulders, he laboriously added, letter by letter, three or four
names. The stern, anxious faces which peered the while at the document
or scanned each other only to find their anxiety reflected, the
flaring lights behind us, the recklessness of some and the distrust of
others, the cloaks in which many were wrapped to the chin, and the
occasional gleam of hidden weapons, made up a scene very striking. The
more as it was no mere show, but some of us saw only too distinctly
behind it the figure of the headsman and the block.

"Now," said Penruddocke, who himself I think took a certain grim
pleasure in the formality, "be ready to swear, gentlemen, in pairs, as
I call the names. Kingston and Matthewson!"

Lolling against the wall under one of the sconces I looked at Master
Bertie, expecting to be called up with him. He smiled as our eyes met;
and I thought with a rush of tenderness how lightly I could have dared
the worst had all my associates been like him. But repining came too
late, and in a moment Penruddocke surprised me by calling out
"Crewdson and Carey!"

So Master Bertie was not to be my companion! I learned afterward that
men who were strangers to one another were purposely associated, the
theory being that each should keep an eye upon his oath-fellow. I went
forward to the end of the table, and took the book.

There was a slight pause.

"Crewdson!" called Penruddocke sharply; "did you not hear, man?"

There was a little stir at the farther end of the room, and he came
forward, moving slowly and reluctantly. I saw that he was the man whom
Penruddocke had called back when we entered, a man of great height,
though slender, and closely cloaked. A drooping gray mustache covered
his mouth, and that was almost all I made out before Sir Thomas, with
some sharpness, bade him uncover. He did so with an abrupt gesture,
and reaching out his hand grasped the other end of the book as though
he would take it from me. His manner was so strange that I looked hard
at him, and he, jerking up his head with a gesture of defiance, looked
at me too, his face very pale.

I heard Penruddocke's voice droning the words of the oath, but I paid
no attention to them--I was busied with something else. Where had I
seen the sinister gleam in those eyes before, and that forehead high
and narrow, and those lean, swarthy cheeks? Where had I before
confronted that very face which now glared into mine across the book?
Its look was bold and defiant, but low down in the cheek I saw a
little pulse beating furiously, a pulse which told of anxiety, and the
jaws, half veiled by the ragged mustache, were set in an iron grip.
Where? Ha! I knew. I dropped my end of the book and stepped back.

"Look to the door!" I cried, my voice sounding harsh and strange in my
own ears. "Let no one leave! I denounce that man!" And raising my hand
I pointed pitilessly at my oath-fellow. "I denounce him--he is a spy
and traitor!"

"I a spy?" the man shouted fiercely--with the fierceness of despair.

"Ay, you! you! Clarence, or Crewdson, or whatever you call yourself, I
denounce you! My time has come!"


[Illustration: ". . . HE IS A SPY AND A TRAITOR!"]




                              CHAPTER XIX.

                          FERDINAND CLUDDE.


The bitterness of that hour long past, when he had left me for death,
when he had played with the human longing for life, and striven
without a thought of pity to corrupt me by hopes and fears the most
awful that mortals know, was in my voice as I spoke. I rejoiced that
vengeance had come upon him at last, and that I was its instrument. I
saw the pallor of a great fear creep into his dark cheek, and read in
his eyes the vicious passion of a wild beast trapped, and felt no
pity. "Master Clarence!" I said, and laughed--laughed mockingly. "You
do not look pleased to see your friends. Or perhaps you do not
remember me. Stand forward, Master Bertie! Maybe he will recognize
you."

But though Master Bertie came forward and stood by my side gazing at
him, the villain's eyes did not for an instant shift from mine. "It is
the man!" my companion said after a solemn pause--for the other,
breathing fast, made no answer. "He was a spy in the pay of Bishop
Gardiner, when I knew him. At the Bishop's death I heard that he
passed into the service of the Spanish Ambassador, the Count de Feria.
He called himself at that time Clarence. I recognize him."

The quiet words had their effect. From full one-half of the savage
crew round us a fierce murmur rose more terrible than any loud outcry.
Yet this seemed a relief to the doomed man; he forced himself to look
away from me and to confront the dark ring of menacing faces which
hemmed him in. The moment he did so he appeared to find courage and
words. "They take me for another man!" he cried in hoarse accents. "I
know nothing of them!" and he added a fearful oath. "He knows me. Ask
him!"

He pointed to Walter Kingston, who was sitting moodily on a tram
outside the ring, and who alone had not risen under the excitement of
my challenge. On being thus appealed to he looked up suddenly. "If I
am to choose between you," he said bitterly, "and say which is the
true man, I know which I shall pick."

"Which?" Clarence murmured. "Which?" This time his tone was different.
In his voice was the ring of hope.

"I should give my vote for you," Kingston replied, looking
contemptuously at him. "I know something about you, but of the other
gentleman I know nothing!"

"And not much of the person you call Crewdson," I retorted fiercely,
"since you do not know his real name."

"I know this much," the young man answered, tapping his boot with his
scabbard with studied carelessness, "that he lent me some money, and
seemed a good fellow and one that hated a mass priest. That is enough
for me. As for his name, it is his fancy perhaps. You call yourself
Carey. Well, I know a good many Careys, but I do not know you, nor
ever heard of you!"

I swung round on him with a hot cheek. But the challenge which was
upon my tongue was anticipated by Master Bertie, who drew me forcibly
back. "Leave this to me, Francis," he said, "and do you watch that
man. Master Kingston and gentlemen," he continued, turning again to
them, and drawing himself to his full height as he addressed them,
"listen, if you please! You know me, if you do not know my friend. The
honor of Richard Bertie has never been challenged until to-night, nor
ever will be with impunity. Leave my friend out of the question and
put me in it. I, Richard Bertie, say that that man is a paid spy and
informer, come here in quest of blood-money! And he, Crewdson, a
nameless man, says that I lie. Choose between us. Or look at him and
judge! Look!"

He was right to bid them look. As the savage murmur rose again and
took from the wretched man his last hope, as the ugliness of despair
and wicked, impotent passion distorted his face, he was indeed the
most deadly witness against himself.

The lights which shone on treacherous weapons half hidden, or on the
glittering eyes of cruel men whose blood was roused, fell on nothing
so dangerous as the livid, despairing face which, unmasked and eyed by
all with aversion, still defied us. Traitor and spy as he was, he had
the merit of courage at least; he would die game. And even as I, with
a first feeling of pity for him, discerned this, his sword was out,
and with a curse he lunged at me.

Penruddocke saved me by a buffet which sent me reeling against the
wall, so that the villain's thrust was spent on air. Before he could
repeat it, four or five men flung themselves upon him from behind. For
a moment there was a great uproar, while the group surrounding him
swayed to and fro as he dragged his captors up and down with a
strength I should not have expected. But the end was certain, and we
stood looking on quietly. In a minute or two they had him down, and
disarming him, bound his hands.

For me he seemed to have a special hatred. "Curse you!" he panted,
glaring at me as he lay helpless. "You have been my evil angel! From
the first day I saw you, you have thwarted me in every plan, and now
you have brought me to this!"

"Not I, but yourself," I answered.

"My curse upon you!" he cried again, the rage and hate in his face so
terrible that I turned away shuddering and sick at heart. "If I could
have killed you," he cried, "I would have died contented."

"Enough!" interposed Penruddocke briskly. "It is well for us that
Master Bertie and his friend came here to-night. Heaven grant it be
not too late! We do not need," he added, looking round, "any more
evidence, I think?"

The dissent was loud, and, save for Kingston, who still sat sulking
apart, unanimous.

"Death?" said the Cornishman quietly.

No one spoke, but each man gave a brief stern nod.

"Very well," the leader continued; "then I propose----"

"One moment," said Master Bertie, interrupting him. "A word with you
apart, with our friends' permission. You can repeat it to them
afterward."

He drew Sir Thomas aside, and they retired into the corner by the
door, where they stood talking in whispers. I had small reason to feel
sympathy for the man who lay there tied and doomed to die like a calf.
Yet even I shuddered--yes, and some of the hardened men round me
shuddered also at the awful expression in his eyes as, without moving
his head, he followed the motions of the two by the door. Some faint
hope springing into being wrung his soul, and brought the perspiration
in great drops to his forehead. I turned away, thinking gravely of the
early morning three years ago when he had tortured me by the very same
hopes and fears which now racked his own spirit.

Penruddocke came back, Master Bertie following him.

"It must not be done to-night," he announced quietly, with a nod which
meant that he would explain the reason afterward. "We will meet again
to-morrow at four in the afternoon instead of at eight in the evening.
Until then two must remain on guard with him. It is right he should
have some time to repent, and he shall have it."

This did not at once find favor.

"Why not run him through now?" said one bluntly. "And meet to-morrow
at some place unknown to him? If we come here again we shall, likely
enough, walk straight into the trap."

"Well, have it that way, if you please," answered Sir Thomas,
shrugging his shoulders. "But do not blame me afterward if you find we
have let slip a golden opportunity. Be fools if you like. I dare say
it will not make much difference in the end!"

He spoke at random, but he knew how to deal with his crew, it seemed,
for on this those who had objected assented reluctantly to the course
he proposed. "Barnes and Walters are here in hiding, so they had
better be the two to guard him," he continued. "There is no fear that
they will be inclined to let him go!" I looked at the men whom the
glances of their fellows singled out, and found them to belong to the
little knot of fanatics I had before remarked: dark, stern men, worth,
if the matter ever came to fighting, all the rest of the band put
together.

"At four, to-morrow, then, we meet," Sir Thomas concluded lightly.
"Then we will deal with him, never fear! Now it is near midnight, and
we must be going. But not all together, or we shall attract
attention."


Half an hour later Master Bertie and I rode softly out of the
courtyard and turned our faces toward the city. The night wind came
sweeping across the valley of the Thames, and met us full in the face
as we reached the brow of the hill. It seemed laden with melancholy
whispers. The wretched enterprise, ill-conceived, ill-ordered, and in
its very nature desperate, to which we were in honor committed, would
have accounted of itself for any degree of foreboding. But the scene
through which we had just passed, and on my part the knowledge that I
had given up a fellow-being to death, had their depressing influences.
For some distance we rode in silence, which I was the first to break.

"Why did you put off his punishment?" I asked.

"Because I think he will give us information in the interval," Bertie
answered briefly. "Information which may help us. A spy is generally
ready to betray his own side upon occasion."

"And you will spare him if he does?" I asked. It seemed to me neither
justice nor mercy.

"No," he said, "there is no fear of that. Those who go with ropes
round their necks know no mercy. But drowning men will catch at
straws; and ten to one he will babble!"

I shivered. "It is a bad business," I said.

He thought I referred to the conspiracy, and he inveighed bitterly
against it, reproaching himself for bringing me into it, and for his
folly in believing the rosy accounts of men who had all to win, and
nothing save their worthless lives to lose. "There is only one thing
gained," he said. "We are likely to pay dearly for that, so we may
think the more of it. We have been the means of punishing a villain."

"Yes," I said, "that is true. It was a strange meeting and a strange
recognition. Strangest of all that I should be called up to swear with
him."

"Not strange," Master Bertie answered gravely. "I would rather call it
providential. Let us think of that, and be of better courage, friend.
We have been used; we shall not be cast away before our time."

I looked back. For some minutes I had thought I heard behind us a
light footstep, more like the pattering of a dog than anything else. I
could see nothing, but that was not wonderful, for the moon was young
and the sky overcast. "Do you hear some one following us?" I said.

Master Bertie drew rein suddenly, and turning in the saddle we
listened. For a second I thought I still heard the sound. The next it
ceased, and only the wind toying with the November leaves and sighing
away in the distance, came to our ears. "No," he said, "I think it
must have been your fancy. I hear nothing."

But when we rode on the sound began again, though at first more
faintly, as if our follower had learned prudence and fallen farther
behind. "Do not stop, but listen!" I said softly. "Cannot you hear the
pattering of a naked foot now?"

"I hear something," he answered. "I am afraid you are right, and that
we are followed."

"What is to be done?" I said, my thoughts busy.

"There is Caen wood in front," he answered, "with a little open ground
on this side of it. We will ride under the trees and then stop
suddenly. Perhaps we shall be able to distinguish him as he crosses
the open behind us." We made the experiment; but as if our follower
had divined the plan, his footstep ceased to sound before we had
stopped our horses. He had fallen farther behind. "We might ride
quickly back," I suggested, "and surprise him."

"It would be useless," Bertie answered. "There is too much cover close
to the road. Let us rather trot on and outstrip him."

We did trot on; and what with the tramp of our horses as they swung
along the road, and the sharp passage of the wind by our ears, we
heard no more of the footstep behind. But when we presently pulled up
to breathe our horses--or rather within a few minutes of our doing
so--there it was behind us, nearer and louder than before. I shivered
as I listened; and presently, acting on a sudden impulse, I wheeled my
horse round and spurred him back a dozen paces along the road.

I pulled up.

There was a movement in the shadow of the trees on my right, and I
leaned forward, peering in that direction. Gradually, I made out the
lines of a figure standing still as though gazing at me; a strange,
distorted figure, crooked, short, and in some way, though no lineament
of the face was visible, expressive of a strange and weird
malevolence. It was the witch! The witch whom I had seen in the
kitchen at the Gatehouse. How, then, had she come hither? How had she,
old, lame, decrepit, kept up with us?

I trembled as she raised her hand, and, standing otherwise motionless,
pointed at me out of the gloom. The horse under me was trembling too,
trembling violently, with its ears laid back, and, as she moved, its
terror increased, it plunged wildly. I had to give for a moment all my
attention to it, and though I tried, in mere revolt against the fear
which I felt was overcoming me, to urge it nearer, my efforts were
vain. After nearly unseating me, the beast whirled round and, getting
the better of me, galloped down the road toward London.

"What is it?" cried Master Bertie, as I came speedily up with him; he
had ridden slowly on. "What is the matter?"

"Something in the hedge startled it," I explained, trying to soothe
the horse. "I could not clearly see what it was."

"A rabbit, I dare say," he remarked, deceived by my manner.

"Perhaps it was," I answered. Some impulse, not unnatural, led me to
say nothing about what I had seen. I was not quite sure that my eyes
had not deceived me. I feared his ridicule, too, though he was not
very prone to ridicule. And above all I shrank from explaining the
medley of superstitious fear, distrust, and abhorrence in which I held
the creature who had shown so strange a knowledge of my life.

We were already near Holborn, and reaching without further adventure a
modest inn near the Bars, we retired to a room we had engaged, and lay
down with none of the gallant hopes which had last night formed the
subject of our talk. Yet we slept well, for depression goes better
with sleep than does the tumult of anticipation; and I was up early,
and down in the yard looking to the horses before London was well
awake. As I entered the stable a man lying curled up in the straw
rolled lazily over and, shading his eyes, glanced up. Apparently he
recognized me, for he got slowly to his feet. "Morning!" he said
gruffly.

I stood staring at him, wondering if I had made a mistake.

"What are you doing here, my man?" I said sharply, when I had made
certain I knew him, and that he was really the surly ostler from the
Gatehouse tavern at Highgate. "Why did you come here? Why have you
followed us?"

"Come about your business," he answered. "To give you that."

I took the note he held out to me. "From whom?" I said. "Who sent it
by you?"

"Cannot tell," he replied, shaking his head.

"Cannot, or will not?" I retorted.

"Both," he said doggedly. "But there, if you want to know what sort of
a kernel is in a nut, you don't shake the tree, master--you crack the
nut."

I looked at the note he had given me. It was but a slip of paper
folded thrice. The sender had not addressed, or sealed, or fastened it
in anyway; had taken no care either to insure its reaching its
destination or to prevent prying eyes seeing the contents. If one of
our associates had sent it, he had been guilty of the grossest
carelessness. "You are sure it is for me?" I said.

"As sure as mortal can be," he answered. "Only that it was given me
for a man, and not a mouse! You are not afraid, master?"

I was not; but he edged away as he spoke, and looked with so much
alarm at the scrap of paper that it was abundantly clear he was very
much afraid himself, even while he derided me. I saw that if I had
offered to return the note he would have backed out of the stable and
gone off there and then as fast as his lame foot would let him. This
puzzled me. However, I read the note. There was nothing in it to
frighten me. Yet, as I read, the color came into my face, for it
contained one name to which I had long been a stranger.

"To Francis Cludde," it ran. "If you would not do a thing of which you
will miserably repent all your life, and which will stain you in the
eyes of all Christian men, meet me two hours before noon at the cross
street by St. Botolph's, where you first saw Mistress Bertram. And
tell no one. Fail not to come. In Heaven's name, fail not!"

The note had nothing to do with the conspiracy, then, on the face of
it; mysterious as it was, and mysteriously as it came. "Look here!" I
said to the man. "Tell me who sent it, and I will give you a crown."

"I would not tell you," he answered stubbornly, "if you could make me
King of England! No, nor King of Spain too! You might rack me and you
would not get it from me!"

His one eye glowed with so obstinate a resolve that I gave up the
attempt to persuade him, and turned to examine the message itself. But
here I fared no better. I did not know the handwriting, and there was
no peculiarity in the paper. I was no wiser than before. "Are you to
take back any answer?" I said.

"No," he replied, "the saints be thanked for the same! But you will
bear me witness," he went on anxiously, "that I gave you the letter.
You will not forget that, or say that you have not had it? But there!"
he added to himself as he turned away, speaking in a low voice, so
that I barely caught the sense of the words, "what is the use? she
will know!"

She will know! It had something to do with a woman then, even if a
woman were not the writer. I went in to breakfast in two minds about
going. I longed to tell Master Bertie and take his advice, though the
unknown had enjoined me not to do so. But for the time I refrained,
and explaining my absence of mind as well as I could, I presently
stole away on some excuse or other, and started in good time, and on
foot, into the city. I reached the rendezvous a quarter of an hour
before the time named, and strolling between the church and the
baker's shop, tried to look as much like a chance passer-by as I
could, keeping the while a wary lookout for any one who might turn out
to be my correspondent.


The morning was cold and gray. A drizzling rain was falling. The
passers were few, and the appearance of the streets dirty and, with
littered kennels, was dreary indeed. I found it hard at once to keep
myself warm and to avoid observation as I hung about. Ten o'clock had
rung from more than one steeple, and I was beginning to think myself a
fool for my pains, when a woman of middle height, slender and young in
figure, but wearing a shabby brown cloak, and with her head muffled in
a hood, as though she had the toothache or dreaded the weather more
than ordinary, turned the corner of the belfry and made straight
toward me. She drew near, and seemed about to pass me without notice.
But when abreast of me she glanced up suddenly, her eyes the only
features I could see.

"Follow me to the church!" she murmured gently. And she swept on to
the porch.

I obeyed reluctantly; very reluctantly, my feet seeming like lead. For
I knew who she was. Though I had only seen her eyes, I had recognized
them, and guessed already what her business with me was. She led the
way resolutely to a quiet corner. The church was empty and still, with
only the scent of incense in the air to tell of a recent service. It
was no surprise to me when she turned abruptly, and, removing her
hood, looked me in the face.

"What have you done with him?" she panted, laying her hand on my arm.
"Speak! Tell me what you have done with him?"

The question, the very question, I had foreseen! Yet I tried to fence
with her. I said, "With whom?"

"With whom?" she repeated bitterly. "You know me! I am not so changed
in three years that you do not recognize me?"

"No; I know you," I said.

There was a hectic flush on her cheeks, and it seemed to me that the
dark hair was thinner on her thin temples than when I had seen her
last. But the eyes were the same.

"Then why ask with whom?" she cried passionately. "What have you done
with the man you called Clarence?"

"Done with him?" I said feebly.

"Ay, done with him? Come, speak and tell me!" she repeated in fierce
accents, her hand clutching my wrist, her eyes probing my face with
merciless glances. "Have you killed him? Tell me!"

"Killed him, Mistress Anne?" I said sullenly. "No, I have not killed
him."

"He is alive?" she cried.

"For all I know, he is alive."

She glared at me for some seconds to assure herself that I was telling
the truth. Then she heaved a great sigh; her hands fell from my
wrists, the color faded out of her face, and she lowered her eyes. I
glanced round with a momentary idea of escape--I so shrank from that
which was to come. But before I had well entertained the notion she
looked up, her face grown calm.

"Then what have you done with him?" she asked.

"I have done nothing with him," I answered.

She laughed; a mirthless laugh. "Bah!" she said, "do not tell me lies!
That is your honor, I suppose--your honor to your friends down in the
cellar there! Do you think that I do not know all about them? Shall I
give you the list? He is a very dangerous conspirator, is Sir Thomas
Penruddocke, is he not? And that scented dandy Master Kingston! Or
Master Crewdson--tell me of him! Tell me of him, I say!" she
exclaimed, with a sudden return from irony to a fierce eagerness, a
breathless impatience. "Why did he not come up last night? What have
you done with him?"

I shook my head, sick and trembling. How could I tell her?

"I see," she said. "You will not tell me. But you swear he is yet
alive, Master Cludde? Good. Then you are holding him for a hostage? Is
that it?" with a piercing glance at my face. "Or, you have condemned
him, but for some reason the sentence has not been executed!" She drew
a long, deep breath, for I fear my face betrayed me. "That is it, is
it? Then there is still time."

She turned from me and looked toward the end of the aisle, where a
dull red lamp hanging before the altar glowed feebly in the warm
scented air. She seemed so to turn and so to look in thankfulness, as
if the news she had learned were good instead of what it was. "What is
the hour fixed?" she asked suddenly.

I shook my head.

"You will not tell me? Well, it matters not," she answered briskly.
"He must be saved. Do you hear? He must be saved, Master Cludde. That
is your business."

I shook my head.

"You think it is not?" she said. "Well, I can show you it is! Listen!"

She raised herself on a step of the font, and looked me harshly in the
face. "If he be not given up to me safe and sound by sunset this
evening, I will betray you all! All! I have the list here," she
muttered sternly, touching her bosom. "You, Master Bertie,
Penruddocke, Fleming, Barnes--all. All, do you hear? Give him up or
you shall hang!"

"You would not do it!" I cried aghast, peering into her burning eyes.

"Would not do it? Fool!" she hissed. "If all the world but he had one
head, I would cut it off to save his! He is my husband! Do you hear?
He is my husband--my all! Do you think I have given up everything,
friends and honor and safety, for him, to lose him now? No! You say I
would not do it? Do you know what I have done? You have a scar there."

She touched me lightly on the breast. "I did it," she said.

"You?" I muttered.

"Yes, I, you blind fool! I did it," she answered. "You escaped then,
and I was glad of it, since the wound answered my purpose. But you
will not escape again. The cord is surer."

Something in her last words crossed my memory and enlightened me.

"You were the woman I saw last night," I said. "You followed us from
High gate."

"What matter! What matter!" she exclaimed impatiently. "Better be
footsore than heartsore. Will you do now what I want? Will you answer
for his life?"

"I can do nothing without the others," I said.

"But the others know nothing," she answered. "They do not know their
own danger. Where will you find them?"

"I shall find them," I replied resolutely. "And in any case I must
consult Master Bertie. Will you come and see him?"

"And be locked up too?" she said sternly, and in a different tone.
"No. It is you must do this, and you must answer for it, Francis
Cludde. You, and no one else."

"I can do nothing by myself," I repeated.

"Ay, but you can--you must!" she retorted, "or Heaven's curse will be
upon you! You think me mad to say that. Listen! Listen, fool! The man
whom you have condemned, whom you have left to die, is not only my
husband, wedded to me these three years, but your father--your father,
Ferdinand Cludde!"




                             CHAPTER XX.

                          THE COMING QUEEN.


I stood glaring at her.

"You were a blind bat or you would have found it out for yourself,"
she continued scornfully. "A babe would have guessed it, knowing as
much of your father as you did."

"Does he know himself?" I muttered hoarsely, looking anywhere but at
her now. The shock had left me dull and confused. I did not doubt her
word, rather I wondered with her that I had not found this out for
myself. But the possibility of meeting my father in that wide world
into which I had plunged to escape from the knowledge of his
existence, had never occurred to me. Had I thought of it, it would
have seemed too unlikely; and though I might have seen in Gardiner a
link between us, and so have identified him, the greatness of the
Chancellor's transactions, and certain things about Clarence which had
seemed, or would have seemed, had I ever taken the point into
consideration, at variance with my ideas of my father, had prevented
me getting upon the track.

"Does he know that you are his son, do you mean?" she said. "No, he
does not."

"You have not told him?"

"No," she answered with a slight shiver.

I understood. I comprehended that even to her the eagerness with
which, being father and son, we had sought one another's lives during
those days on the Rhine, had seemed so dreadful that she had concealed
the truth from him.

"When did you learn it?" I asked, trembling too.

"I knew his right name before I ever saw you," she answered. "Yours I
learned on the day I left you at Santon." Looking back I remembered
the strange horror, then inexplicable, which she had betrayed; and I
understood it. So it was that knowledge which had driven her from us!
"What will you do now?" she said. "You will save him? You must save
him! He is your father."

Save him? I shuddered at the thought that I had destroyed him! that I,
his son, had denounced him! Save him! The perspiration sprang out in
beads on my forehead. If I could not save him I should live pitied by
my friends and loathed by my enemies!

"If it be possible," I muttered, "I will save him."

"You swear it?" she cried. Before I could answer she seized my arm and
dragged me up the dim aisle until we stood together before the Figure
and the Cross. The chimes above us rang eleven. A shaft of cold
sunshine pierced a dusty window, and, full of dancing motes, shot
athwart the pillars.

"Swear!" she repeated with trembling eagerness, turning her eyes on
mine, and raising her hand solemnly toward the Figure. "Swear by the
Cross!"

"I swear," I said.

She dropped her hand. Her form seemed to shrink and grow less. Making
a sign to me to go, she fell on her knees on the step, and drew her
hood over her face. I walked away on tiptoe down the aisle, but
glancing back from the door of the church I saw the small, solitary
figure still kneeling in prayer. The sunshine had died away. The dusty
window was colorless. Only the red lamp glowed dully above her head. I
seemed to see what the end would be. Then I pushed aside the curtain,
and slipped out into the keen air. It was hers to pray. It was mine to
act.

I lost no time, but on my return I could not find Master Bertie either
in the public room or in the inn yard, so I sought him in his bedroom,
where I found him placidly reading a book; his patient waiting in
striking contrast with the feverish anxiety which had taken hold of
me. "What is it, lad?" he said, closing the volume, and laying it down
on my entrance. "You look disturbed?"

"I have seen Mistress Anne," I answered. He whistled softly, staring
at me without a word. "She knows all," I continued.

"How much is all?" he asked after a pause.

"Our names--all our names, Penruddocke's, Kingston's, the others; our
meeting-place, and that we hold Clarence a prisoner. She was that old
woman whom we saw at the Gatehouse tavern last night."

He nodded, appearing neither greatly surprised nor greatly alarmed.
"Does she intend to use her knowledge?" he said. "I suppose she does."

"Unless we let him go safe and unhurt before sunset."

"They will never consent to it," he answered, shaking his head.

"Then they will hang!" I cried.

He looked hard at me a moment, discerning something strange in the
bitterness of my last words. "Come, lad," he said, "you have not told
me all. What else have you learned?"

"How can I tell you?" I cried wildly, waving him off, and going to the
lattice that my face might be hidden from him. "Heaven has cursed me!"
I added, my voice breaking.

He came and laid his hand on my shoulder. "Heaven curses no one," he
said. "Most of our curses we make for ourselves. What is it, lad?"

I covered my face with my hands. "He--he is my father," I muttered.
"Do you understand? Do you see what I have done? He is my father!"

"Ha!" Master Bertie uttered that one exclamation in intense
astonishment; then he said no more. But the pressure of his hand told
me that he understood, that he felt with me, that he would help me.
And that silent comprehension, that silent assurance, gave the
sweetest comfort. "He must be allowed to go, then, for this time," he
resumed gravely, after a pause in which I had had time to recover
myself. "We will see to it. But there will be difficulties. You must
be strong and brave. The truth must be told. It is the only way."

I saw that it was, though I shrank exceedingly from the ordeal before
me. Master Bertie advised, when I grew more calm, that we should be
the first at the rendezvous, lest by some chance Penruddocke's orders
should be anticipated; and accordingly, soon after two o'clock, we
mounted, and set forth. I remarked that my companion looked very
carefully to his arms, and, taking the hint, I followed his example.

It was a silent, melancholy, anxious ride. However successful we might
be in rescuing my father--alas! that I should have to-day and always
to call that man father--I could not escape the future before me. I
had felt shame while he was but a name to me; how could I endure to
live, with his infamy always before my eyes? Petronilla, of whom I had
been thinking so much since I returned to England, whose knot of
velvet had never left my breast nor her gentle face my heart--how
could I go back to her now? I had thought my father dead, and his name
and fame old tales. But the years of foreign life which yesterday had
seemed a sufficient barrier between his past and myself--of what use
were they now? Or the foreign service I had fondly regarded as a kind
of purification?

Master Bertie broke in on my reverie much as if he had followed its
course. "Understand one thing, lad!" he said, laying his hand on the
withers of my horse. "Yours must not be the hand to punish your
father. But after to-day you will owe him no duty. You will part from
him to-day and he will be a stranger to you. He deserted you when you
were a child; and if you owe reverence to any one, it is to your uncle
and not to him. He has himself severed the ties between you."

"Yes," I said. "I will go abroad. I will go back to Wilna."

"If ill comes of our enterprise--as I fear ill will come--we will both
go back, if we can," he answered. "If good by any chance should come
of it, then you shall be my brother, our family shall be your family.
The Duchess is rich enough," he added with a smile, "to allow you a
younger brother's portion."

I could not answer him as I desired, for we passed at that moment
under the archway, and became instantly involved in the bustle going
forward in the courtyard. Near the principal door of the inn stood
eight or nine horses gayly caparisoned and in the charge of three
foreign-looking men, who, lounging in their saddles, were passing a
jug from hand to hand. They turned as we rode in and looked at us
curiously, but not with any impertinence. Apparently they were waiting
for the rest of their party, who were inside the house. Civilly
disposed as they seemed, the fact that they were armed, and wore rich
liveries of black and gold, caused me, and I think both of us, a
momentary alarm.

"Who are they?" Master Bertie asked in a low voice, as he rode to the
opposite door and dismounted with his back to them.

"They are Spaniards, I fancy," I said, scanning them over the
shoulders of my horse as I too got off. "Old friends, so to speak."

"They seem wonderfully subdued for them," he answered, "and on their
best behavior. If half the tales we heard this morning be true, they
are not wont to carry themselves like this."

Yet they certainly were Spanish, for I overheard them speaking to one
another in that language; and before we had well dismounted, their
leader--whom they received with great respect, one of them jumping
down to hold his stirrup--came out with three or four more and got to
horse again. Turning his rein to lead the way out through the north
gate he passed near us, and as he settled himself in his saddle took a
good look at us. The look passed harmlessly over me, but reaching
Master Bertie became concentrated. The rider started and smiled
faintly. He seemed to pause, then he raised his plumed cap and bowed
low--covered himself again and rode on. His train all followed his
example and saluted us as they passed. Master Bertie's face, which had
flushed a fiery red under the other's gaze, grew pale again. He looked
at me, when they had gone by, with startled eyes.

"Do you know who that was?" he said, speaking like one who had
received a blow and did not yet know how much he was hurt.

"No," I said.

"It was the Count de Feria, the Spanish Ambassador," he answered. "And
he recognized me. I met him often, years ago. I knew him again as soon
as he came out, but I did not think he would by any chance recognize
me in this dress."

"Are you sure," I asked in amazement, "that it was he?"

"Quite sure," he answered.

"But why did he not have you arrested, or at least detained? The
warrants are still out against you."

Master Bertie shook his head. "I cannot tell," he said darkly. "He is
a Spaniard. But come, we have the less time to lose. We must join our
friends and take their advice; we seem to be surrounded by pitfalls."

At this moment the lame ostler came up, and grumbling at us as if he
had never seen us in his life before, and never wished to see us
again, took our horses. We went into the kitchen, and taking the first
chance of slipping upstairs to No. 15, we were admitted with the same
precautions as before, and descending the shaft gained the cellar.


Here we were not, as we had looked to be, the first on the scene. I
suppose a sense of the insecurity of our meeting-place had led every
one to come early, so as to be gone early. Penruddocke indeed was not
here yet, but Kingston and half a score of others were sitting about
conversing in low tones. It was plain that the distrust and suspicion
which we had remarked on the previous day had not been allayed by the
discovery of Clarence's treachery.

Indeed, it was clear that the distrust and despondency had to-day
become a panic. Men glared at one another and at the door, and talked
in whispers and started at the slightest sound. I glanced round. The
one I sought for with eager yet shrinking eyes was not to be seen. I
turned to Master Bertie, my face mutely calling on him to ask the
question. "Where is the prisoner?" he said sharply.

A moment I hung in suspense. Then one of the men said, "He is in
there. He is safe enough!" He pointed, as he spoke, to a door which
seemed to lead to an inner cellar.

"Right," said Master Bertie, still standing. "I have two pieces of bad
news for you nevertheless. Firstly I have just been recognized by the
Spanish Ambassador, whom I met in the courtyard above."

Half the men rose to their feet. "What is he doing here?" they cried,
one boldly, the others with the quaver very plain in their voices.

"I do not know; but he recognized me. Why he took no steps to detain
or arrest me I cannot tell. He rode away by the north road."

They gazed at one another and we at them. The wolfish look which fear
brings into some faces grew stronger in theirs.

"What is your other bad news?" said Kingston, with an oath.

"A person outside, a friend of the prisoner, has a list of our names,
and knows our meeting-place and our plans. She threatens to use the
knowledge unless the man Clarence or Crewdson be set free."

There was a loud murmur of wrath and dismay, amid which Kingston alone
preserved his composure. "We might have been prepared for that," he
said quietly. "It is an old precaution of such folk. But how did you
come to hear of it?"

"My friend here saw the messenger and heard the terms. The man must be
set free by sunset."

"And what warranty have we that he will not go straight with his plans
and his list to the Council?"

Master Bertie could not answer that, neither could I; we had no
surety, and if we set him free could take none save his word. _His
word!_ Could even I ask them to accept that? To stake the life of the
meanest of them on it?

I saw the difficulties of the position, and when Master Kingston
pronounced coolly that this was a waste of time, and that the only
wise course was to dispose of the principal witness, both in the
interests of justice and our own safety, and then shift for ourselves
before the storm broke, I acknowledged in my heart the wisdom of the
course, and felt that yesterday it would have received my assent.

"The risk is about the same either way," Master Bertie said.

"Not at all," Kingston objected, a sparkle of malice in his eye. Last
night we had thwarted him. To-night it was his turn; and the dark
lowering looks of those round him showed that numbers were with him.
"This fellow can hang us all. His accomplice who escapes can know
nothing save through him, and could give only vague and uncertain
evidence. No, no. Let us cast lots who shall do it, get it done
quickly, and begone."

"We must wait at least," Bertie urged, "until Sir Thomas comes."

"No!" retorted Kingston, with heat. "We are all equal here. Besides
the man was condemned yesterday, with the full assent of all. It only
remains to carry out the sentence. Surely this gentleman," he
continued, turning suddenly upon me, "who was so ready to accuse him
yesterday, does not wish him spared to-day?"

"I do wish it," I said, in a low tone.

"Ho! ho!" he cried, folding his arms and throwing back his head,
astonished at the success of his own question. "Then may we ask for
your reasons, sir? Last night you could not lay your tongue to words
too bad for him. Tonight you wish to spare him, and let him go?"

"I do," I said. I felt that every eye was upon me, and that, Master
Bertie excepted, not one there would feel sympathy with me in my
humiliation. They were driven to the wall. They had no time for fine
feeling, for sympathy, for appreciation of the tragic, unless it
touched themselves. What chance had I with them, though I was a son
pleading for a father? Nay, what argument had I save that I was his
son, and that I had brought him to this? No argument. Only the appeal
to them that they would not make me a parricide! And I felt that at
this they would mock.

And so, in view of those stern, curious faces, a new temptation seized
me--the temptation to be silent. Why should I not stand by and let
things take their course? Why should I not spare myself the shame
which I already saw would be fruitless? When Master Kingston, with a
cynical bow, said, "Your reasons, sir?" I stood mute and trembling. If
I kept silence, if I refused to give my reasons, if I did not
acknowledge the prisoner, but merely begged his life, he would die,
and the connection between us would be known only to one or two. I
should be freed from him and might go my own way. The sins of
Ferdinand Cludde were well-nigh forgotten--why take to myself the sins
of Clarence, which would otherwise never stain my name, would never be
associated with my father or myself?

Why, indeed? It was a great and sore temptation, as I stood there
before all those eyes. He had deserved death. I had given him up in
perfect innocence. Had I any right to call on them to risk their lives
that I might go harmless in conscience, and he in person? Had I----

What, was there after all some taint in my blood? Was I going to
become like him--to take to myself a shame of my own earning, in the
effort to escape from the burden of his ill-fame? I remembered in time
the oath I had sworn, and when Kingston repeated his question, I
answered him quickly. "I did not know yesterday who he was," I said.
"I have discovered since that he is my father. I ask nothing on his
account. Were he only my father I would not plead for him. I plead for
myself," I murmured. "If you show no pity, you make me a parricide."

I had done them wrong. There was something in my voice, I suppose, as
I said the words which cost me so much, which wrought with almost all
of them in a degree. They gazed at me with awed, wondering faces, and
murmured "His father!" in low tones. They were recalling the scene of
last night, the moment when I had denounced him, the curse he had
hurled at me, the half-told story of which that had seemed the climax.
I had wronged them. They did see the tragedy of it.

Yes, they pitied me; but they showed plainly that they would still do
what perhaps I should have done in their place--justice. "He knows too
much!" said one. "Our lives are as good as his," muttered another--the
first to become thoroughly himself again--"why should we all die for
him?" The wolfish glare came back fast to their eyes. They handled
their weapons impatiently. They were longing to be away. At this
moment, when I saw I had indeed made my confession in vain, Master
Bertie struck in. "What," he said, "if Master Carey and I take charge
of him, and escorting him to his agent without, be answerable for both
of them?"

"You would be only putting your necks into the noose!" said Kingston.

"We will risk that!" replied my friend--and what a friend and what a
man he seemed amid that ignoble crew!--"I will myself promise you that
if he refuse to remain with us until midnight, or tries wherever we
are to raise an alarm or communicate with any one, I will run him
through with my own hand? Will not that satisfy you?"

"No," Master Kingston retorted, "it will not! A bird in the hand is
worth two in the bush!"

"But the woman outside?" said one timidly.

"We must run that risk!" quoth he. "In an hour or two we shall be in
hiding. Come, the lot must be drawn. For this gentleman, let him stand
aside."

I leaned against the wall, dazed and horror-stricken. Now that I had
identified myself with him I felt a great longing to save him. I
scarcely noticed the group drawing pieces of paper at the table. My
every thought was taken up with the low door over there, and the
wretched man lying bound in the darkness behind it. What must be the
horror, the black despair, the hate and defiance of his mind as he lay
there, trapped at last like any beast of prey? It was horrible!
horrible! horrible!

I covered my face and could not restrain the cry of unutterable
distress which rose to my lips. They looked round, two or three of
them, from the table. But the impression my appeal had made upon them
had faded away already, and they only shrugged their shoulders and
turned again to their task. Master Bertie alone stood apart, his arms
folded, his face grave and dark. He too had abandoned hope. There
seemed no hope, when suddenly there came a knocking at the door. The
papers were dropped, and while some stood as if stiffened into stone,
others turned and gazed at their neighbors. It was a knocking more
hasty and imperative than the usual summons, though given in the same
fashion. At last a man found tongue. "It is Sir Thomas," he suggested,
with a sigh of relief. "He is in a hurry and brings news. I know his
knock."

"Then open the door, fool," cried Kingston. "If you can see through a
two-inch plank, why do you stand there like a gaby?"

Master Bertie anticipated the man, and himself opened the door and
admitted the knocker. Penruddocke it was; he came in, still drumming
on the door with his fist, his eyes sparkling, his ruddy cheeks aglow.
He crossed the threshold with a swagger, and looking at us all burst
into a strange peal of laughter. "Yoicks! Gone to earth!" he shouted,
waving his hand as if he had a whip in it. "Gone to earth--gone
forever! Did you think it was the Lords of the Council, my lads?"

He had left the door wide open behind him, and we now saw in the
doorway the seafaring man who usually guarded the room above. "What
does this mean, Sir Thomas?" Kingston said sternly. He thought, I
fancy, as many of us did, that the knight was drunk. "Have you given
that man permission to leave his post?"

"Post? There are no more posts," cried Sir Thomas, with a strange
jollity. He certainly was drunk, but perhaps not with liquor. "Except
good fat posts," he continued, smacking Master Bertie on the shoulder,
"for loyal men who have done the state service, and risked their lives
in evil times! Posts? I shall get so drunk to-night that the stoutest
post on Ludgate will not hold me up!"

"You seem to have gone far that way already," my friend said coldly.

"So will you, when you hear the news!" Penruddocke replied more
soberly. "Lads, the Queen is dying!"

In the vaulted room his statement was received in silence; a silence
dictated by no feeling for the woman going before her Maker--how
should we who were plotting against her feel for her, we who were for
the most part homeless and proscribed through her?--but the silence of
men in doubt, in doubt whether this might mean all that from Sir
Thomas's aspect it seemed to mean.

"She cannot live a week!" Penruddocke continued. "The doctors have
given up hope, and at the palace all is in confusion. She has named
the Princess Elizabeth her successor, and even now Cecil is drawing up
the proclamations. To show that the game is really up, the Count de
Feria, the Spanish Ambassador, has gone this very day to Hatfield to
pay his respects to the coming queen."

Then indeed the vaulted roof did ring--ring and ring again with shouts
of "The Coming Queen!" Men over whom the wings of death had seemed a
minute ago to be hovering, darkening all things to them, looked up and
saw the sun. "The Coming Queen!" they cried.

"You need fear nothing!" continued Penruddocke wildly. "No one will
dare to execute the warrants. The Bishops are shaking in their miters.
Pole is said to be dying. Bonner is more likely to hang himself than
burn others. Up and out and play the man! Away to your counties and
get ready your tar-barrels! Now we will give them a taste of the Cujus
Regio! Ho! drawer, there! A cup of ale!"

He turned, and shouting a scrap of a song, swaggered back into the
shaft and began to ascend. They all trooped after him, talking and
laughing, a reckless, good-natured crew, looking to a man as if they
had never known fear or selfishness--as if distrust were a thing
impossible to them. Master Kingston alone, whom his losses had soured
and who still brooded over his revenge, went off moodily.

I was for stopping one of them; but Master Bertie directed my eyes by
a gesture of his hand to the door at the far end of the cellar, and I
saw that the key was in the lock. He wrung my hand hard. "Tell him
all," he muttered. "I will wait above."




                             CHAPTER XXI.

                              MY FATHER.


Tell him all? I stood thinking, my hand on the key. The voices of the
rearmost of the conspirators sounded more and more faintly as they
passed up the shaft, until their last accents died in the room above,
and silence followed; a silence in strange contrast with the bright
glare of the torches which burned round me and lit up the empty cellar
as for a feast. I was wondering what he would say when I told him
all--when I said "I am your son! I, whom Providence has used to thwart
your plans, whose life you sought, whom, without a thought of pity,
you left to perish! I am your son!"

Infinitely I dreaded the moment when I should tell him this, and hear
his answer; and I lingered with my hand on the key until an abrupt
knocking on the other side of the door brought the blood to my face.
Before I could turn the key the hasty summons was repeated, and grew
to a frantic, hurried drumming on the boards--a sound which plainly
told of terror suddenly conceived and in an instant full-grown. A
hoarse cry followed, coming dully to my ears through the thickness of
the door, and the next moment the stout planks shook as a heavy weight
fell against them.

I turned the key, and the door was flung open from within. My father
stumbled out.

The strong light for an instant blinded him, and he blinked as an owl
does brought to the sunshine. Even in him the long hours passed in
solitude and the blackness of despair had worked changes. His hair was
grayer; in patches it was almost white, and then again dark. He had
gnawed his lower lip, and there were bloodstains on it. His mustache,
too, was ragged and torn, as if he had gnawed that also. His eyes were
bloodshot, his lean face was white and haggard and fierce.

"Ha!" he cried, trembling, as he peered round, "I thought they had
left me to starve! There were rats in there! I thought----"

He stopped. He saw me standing holding the edge of the door. He saw
that otherwise the room was empty, the farther door leading to the
shaft open. An open door! To him doubtless it seemed of all sights the
most wonderful, the most heavenly! His knees began to shake under him.

"What is it?" he muttered. "What were they shouting about? I heard
them shouting."

"The queen is dying," I answered simply, "or dead, and you can do us
no more harm. You are free."

"Free?" He repeated the word, leaning against the wall, his eyes wild
and glaring, his lips parted.

"Yes, free," I answered, in a lower voice--"free to go out into the
air of heaven a living man!" I paused. For a moment I could not
continue. Then I added solemnly, "Sir, Providence has saved you from
death, and me from a crime."

He leaned still against the wall, dazed, thunderstruck, almost
incredulous, and looked from me to the open door and back again as if
without this constant testimony of his eyes he could not believe in
his escape.

"It was not Anne?" he murmured. "She did not----"

"She tried to save your life," I answered; "but they would not listen
to her."

"Did she come here?"

As he spoke, he straightened himself with an effort and stood up. He
was growing more like himself.

"No," I answered. "She sent for me and told me her terms. But Kingston
and the others would not listen to them. You would have been dead now,
though I did all I could to save you, if Penruddocke had not brought
this news of the queen."

"She is dead?"

"She is dying. The Spanish Ambassador," I added, to clinch the matter,
for I saw he doubted, "rode through here this afternoon to pay his
court to the Princess Elizabeth at Hatfield."

He looked down at the ground, thinking deeply. Most men would have
been unable to think at all, unable to concentrate their thoughts on
anything save their escape from death. But a life of daily risk and
hazard had so hardened this man that I was certain, as I watched him,
that he was not praying nor giving thanks. He was already pondering
how he might make the most out of the change; how he might to the best
advantage sell his knowledge of the government whose hours were
numbered to the government which soon would be. The life of intrigue
had become second nature to him.

He looked up and our eyes met. We gazed at one another.

"Why are you here?" he said curiously. "Why did they leave you? Why
were you the one to stop to set me free, Master Carey?"

"My name is not Carey," I answered.

"What is it, then?" he asked carelessly.

"Cludde," I answered softly.

"Cludde!" He called it out. Even his self-mastery could not cope with
this surprise. "Cludde," he said again--said it twice in a lower
voice.

"Yes, Cludde," I answered, meeting and yet shrinking from his
questioning eyes, "my name is Cludde. So is yours. I tried to save
your life, because I learned from Mistress Anne----"

I paused. I shrank from telling him that which, as it seemed to me,
would strike him to the ground in shame and horror. But he had no
fear.

"What?" he cried. "What did you learn?"

"That you are my father," I answered slowly. "I am Francis Cludde, the
son whom you deserted many years ago, and to whom Sir Anthony gave a
home at Coton."

I expected him to do anything except what he did. He stared at me with
astonished eyes for a minute, and then a low whistle issued from his
lips.

"My son, are you! My son!" he said coolly. "And how long have you
known this, young sir?"

"Since yesterday," I murmured. The words he had used on that morning
at Santon, when he had bidden me die and rot, were fresh in my
memory--in my memory, not in his. I recalled his treachery to the
Duchess, his pursuit of us, his departure with Anne, the words in
which he had cursed me. He remembered apparently none of these things,
but simply gazed at me with a thoughtful smile.

"I wish I had known it before," he said at last. "Things might have
been different. A pretty dutiful son you have been!"

The sneer did me good. It recalled to my mind what Master Bertie had
said.

"There can be no question of duty between us," I answered firmly.
"What duty I owe to any one of my family, I owe to my uncle."

"Then why have you told me this?"

"Because I thought it right you should know it," I answered, "were it
only that, knowing it, we may go different ways. We have nearly done
one another a mischief more than once," I added gravely.

He laughed. He was not one whit abashed by the discovery, nor awed,
nor cast down. There was even in his cynical face a gleam of
kindliness and pride as he scanned me. We were almost of a height--I
the taller by an inch or two; and in our features I believe there was
a likeness, though not such as to invite remark.

"You have grown to be a chip of the old block," he said coolly. "I
would as soon have you for a son as another. I think on the whole I am
pleased. You talked of Providence just now"--this with a laugh of
serene amusement--"and perhaps you were right. Perhaps there is such a
thing. For I am growing old, and lo! it gives me a son to take care of
me."

I shook my head. I could never be that kind of son to him.

"Wait a bit," he said, frowning slightly. "You think your side is up
and mine is down, and I can do you no good now, but only harm. You are
ashamed of me. Well, wait," he continued, nodding confidently. "Do not
be too sure that I cannot help you. I have been wrecked a dozen times,
but I never yet failed to find a boat that would take me to shore."

Yes, he was so arrogant in the pride of his many deceits that an hour
after Heaven had stretched out its hand to save him, he denied its
power and took the glory to himself. I did not know what to say to
him, how to undeceive him, how to tell him that it was not the failure
of his treachery which shamed me, but the treachery itself. I could
only remain silent.

And so he mistook me; and, after pondering a moment with his chin in
his hand, he continued:

"I have a plan, my lad. The Queen dies. Well--I am no bigot--long live
the Queen and the Protestant religion! The down will be up and the up
down, and the Protestants will be everything. It will go hard then
with those who cling to the old faith."

He looked at me with a crafty smile, his head on one side.

"I do not understand," I said coldly.

"Then listen. Sir Anthony, will hold by his religion. He used to be a
choleric gentleman, and as obstinate as a mule. He will need but to be
pricked up a little, and he will get into trouble with the authorities
as sure as eggs are eggs. I will answer for it. And then----"

"Well?" I said grimly. How was I to observe even a show of respect for
him when I was quivering with fierce wrath and abhorrence? "Do you
think that will benefit _you?_" I cried. "Do you think that you are so
high in favor with Cecil and the Protestants that they will set you in
Sir Anthony's place? You!"

He looked at me still more craftily, not put out by my indignation,
but rather amused by it.

"No, lad, not me," he replied, with tolerant good-nature. "I am
somewhat blown upon of late. But Providence has not given me back my
son for nothing. I am not alone in the world now. I must remember my
family. I must think a little of others as well as of myself."

"What do you mean?" I said, recoiling.

He scanned me for a moment, with his eyes half-shut, his head on one
side. Then he laughed, a cynical, jarring laugh.

"Good boy!" he said. "Excellent boy! He knows no more than he is told.
His hands are clean, and he has friends upon the winning side who will
not see him lose a chance, should a chance turn up. Be satisfied. Keep
your hands clean if you like, boy. We understand one another."

He laughed again and turned away; and, much as I dreaded and disliked
him, there was something in the indomitable nature of the man which
wrung from me a meed of admiration. Could the best of men have
recovered more quickly from despair? Could the best of men, their
plans failing, have begun to spin fresh webs with equal patience?
Could the most courageous and faithful of those who have tried to work
the world's bettering, have faced the downfall of their hopes with
stouter hearts, with more genuine resignation? Bad as he was, he had
courage and endurance beyond the common.

He came back to me when he had gone a few paces.

"Do you know where my sword is?" he asked in a matter-of-fact tone, as
one might ask a question of an old comrade.

I found it cast aside behind the door. He took it from me, grumbling
over a nick in the edge, which he had caused by some desperate blow
when he was seized. He fastened it on with an oath. I could not look
at the sword without remembering how nearly he had taken my life with
it. The recollection did not trouble him in the slightest.

"Now farewell!" he said carelessly, "I am going to turn over a new
leaf, and begin returning good for evil. Do you go to your friends and
do your work, and I will go to my friends and do mine."

Then with a nod he walked briskly away, and I heard him climb the
ladder and depart.

What was he going to do? I was so deeply amazed by the interview that
I did not understand. I had thought him a wicked man, but I had not
conceived the hardness of his nature. As I stood alone looking round
the vault, I could hardly believe that I had met and spoken to my
father, and told him I was his son--and this was all! I could hardly
believe that he had gone away with this knowledge, unmoved and
unrepentant; alike unwarned by the Providence which had used me to
thwart his schemes, and untouched by the beneficence which had thrice
held him back from the crime of killing me--ay, proof even against the
long-suffering which had plucked him from the abyss and given him one
more chance of repentance.


I found Master Bertie in the stables waiting for me with some
impatience. Of which, upon the whole, I was glad. For I had no wish to
be closely questioned, and the account I gave him of the interview
might at another time have seemed disjointed and incoherent. He
listened to it, however, without remark; and his next words made it
clear that he had other matters in his mind.

"I do not know what to do about fetching the Duchess over," he said.
"This news seems to be true, and she ought to be here."

"Certainly," I agreed.

"The country in general is well affected to the Princess Elizabeth,"
he continued. "Yet the interests of the Bishops, of the Spanish
faction, and of some of the council, will lie in giving trouble. To
avoid this, we should show our strength. Therefore I want the Duchess
to come over with all speed. Will you fetch her?" he added sharply,
turning to me.

"Will I?" I cried in surprise.

"Yes, you. I cannot well go myself at this crisis. Will you go
instead?"

"Of course I will," I answered.

And the prospect cheered me wonderfully. It gave me something to do,
and opened my eyes to the great change of which Penruddocke had been
the herald, a change which was even then beginning. As we rode down
Highgate Hill that day, messengers were speeding north and south and
east and west, to Norwich and Bristol and Canterbury and Coventry and
York, with the tidings that the somber rule under which England had
groaned for five years and more was coming to an end. If in a dozen
towns of England they roped their bells afresh; if in every county, as
Penruddocke had prophesied, they got their tar-barrels ready; if all,
save a few old-fashioned folk and a few gloomy bigots and hysterical
women, awoke as from an evil dream; if even sensible men saw in the
coming of the young queen a panacea for all their ills--a quenching of
Smithfield fires, a Calais recovered, a cure for the worthless coinage
which hampered trade, and a riddance of worthless foreigners who
plundered it--with better roads, purer justice, a fuller Exchequer,
more favorable seasons--if England read all this in that news of
Penruddocke's, was it not something to us also?

It was indeed. We were saved at the last moment from the dangerous
enterprise on which we had rashly embarked. We had now such prospects
before us as only the success of that scheme could have ordinarily
opened. Ease and honor instead of the gallows, and to lie warm instead
of creaking in the wind! Thinking of this, I fell into a better frame
of mind as I jogged along toward London. For what, after all, was my
father to me, that his existence should make me unhappy, or rob mine
of all pleasure? I had made a place for myself in the world. I had
earned friends for myself. He might take away my pride in the one, but
he could never rob me of the love of the others--of those who had
eaten and drunk and fought and suffered beside me, and for whom I too
had fought and suffered!

                          *   *   *   *   *

"A strange time for the swallows to come back," said my lady, turning
to smile at me, as I rode on her off-side.


It would have been strange, indeed, if there had been swallows in the
air. For it was the end of December. The roads were frost-bound and
the trees leafless. The east wind, gathering force in its rush across
the Essex marshes, whirled before it the last trophies of Hainault
Forest, and seemed, as it whistled by our ears and shaved our faces,
to grudge us the shelter to which we were hastening. The long train
behind us--for the good times of which we had talked so often had
come--were full of the huge fire we expected to find at the inn at
Barking--our last stage on the road to London. And if the Duchess and
I bore the cold more patiently, it was probably because we had more
food for thought--and perhaps thicker raiment.

"Do not shake your head," she continued, glancing at me with mischief
in her eyes, "and flatter yourself you will not go back, but will go
on making yourself and some one else unhappy. You will do nothing of
the kind, Francis. Before the spring comes you and I will ride over
the drawbridge at Coton End, or I am a Dutchwoman!"

"I cannot see that things are changed," I said.

"Not changed?" she replied. "When you left, you were nobody. Now
you are somebody, if it be only in having a sister with a dozen
serving-men in her train. Leave it to me. And now, thank Heaven, we
are here! I am so stiff and cold, you must lift me down. We have not
to ride far after dinner, I hope."

"Only seven miles," I answered, as the host, who had been warned by an
outrider to expect us, came running out with a tail at his heels.

"What news from London, Master Landlord?" I said to him as he led us
through the kitchen, where there was indeed a great fire, but no
chimney, and so to a smaller room possessing both these luxuries. "Is
all quiet?"

"Certainly, your worship," he replied, bowing and rubbing his hands.
"There never was such an accession, nor more ale drunk, nor powder
burned--and I have seen three--and there was pretty shouting at old
King Harry's, but not like this. Such a fair young queen, men report,
with a look of the stout king about her, and as prudent and discreet
as if she had changed heads with Sir William Cecil. God bless her, say
I, and send her a wise husband!"

"And a loving one," quoth my lady prettily. "Amen."

"I am glad all has gone off well," I continued, speaking to the
Duchess, as I turned to the blazing hearth. "If there had been blows,
I would fain have been here to strike one."

"Nay, sir, not a finger has wagged against her," the landlord
answered, kicking the logs together--"to speak of, that is, your
worship. I do hear to-day of a little trouble down in Warwickshire.
But it is no more than a storm in a wash-tub, I am told."

"In Warwickshire?" I said, arrested, in the act of taking off my
cloak, by the familiar name. "In what part, my man?"

"I am not clear about that, sir, not knowing the country," he replied.
"But I heard that a gentleman there had fallen foul of her Grace's
orders about church matters, and beaten the officers sent to see them
carried out; and that, when the sheriff remonstrated with him, he beat
him too. But I warrant they will soon bring him to his senses."

"Did you hear his name?" I asked. There was a natural misgiving in my
mind. Warwickshire was large; and yet something in the tale smacked of
Sir Anthony.

"I did hear it," the host answered, scratching his head, "but I cannot
call it to mind. I think I should know it if I heard it."

"Was it Sir Anthony Cludde?"

"It was that very same name!" he exclaimed, clapping his hands in
wonder. "To be sure! Your worship has it pat!"

I slipped back into my cloak again, and snatched up my hat and whip.
But the Duchess was as quick. She stepped between me and the door.

"Sit down, Francis!" she said imperiously. "What would you be at?"

"What would I be at?" I cried with emotion. "I would be with my uncle.
I shall take horse at once and ride Warwickshire way with all speed.
It is possible that I may be in time to avert the consequences. At
least I can see that my cousin comes to no harm."

"Good lad," she said placidly. "You shall start tomorrow."

"To-morrow!" I cried impatiently. "But time is everything, madam."

"You shall start to-morrow," she repeated. "Time is not everything,
firebrand! If you start to-day what can you do? Nothing! No more than
if the thing had happened three years ago, before you met me. But
to-morrow--when you have seen the Secretary of State, as I promise you
you shall, this evening if he be in London--to-morrow you shall go in
a different character, and with credentials."

"You will do this for me?" I exclaimed, leaping up and taking her
hand, for I saw in a moment the wisdom of the course she proposed.
"You will get me----"

"I will get you something to the purpose," my lady answered roundly.
"Something that shall save your uncle if there be any power in England
can save him. You shall have it, Frank," she added, her color rising,
and her eyes filling, as I kissed her hand, "though I have to take
Master Secretary by the beard!"




                            CHAPTER XXII.

                        SIR ANTHONY'S PURPOSE.


Late, as I have heard, on the afternoon of November 20, 1558, a man
riding between Oxford and Worcester, with the news of the queen's
death, caught sight of the gateway tower at Coton End, which is
plainly visible from the road. Though he had already drunk that day as
much ale as would have sufficed him for a week when the queen was
well, yet much wants more. He calculated he had time to stop and taste
the Squire's brewing, which he judged, from the look of the tower,
might be worth his news; and he rode through the gate and railed at
his nag for stumbling.

Half way across the Chase he met Sir Anthony. The old gentleman was
walking out, with his staff in his hand and his dogs behind him, to
take the air before supper. The man, while he was still a hundred
paces off, began to wave his hat and shout something, which ale and
excitement rendered unintelligible.

"What is the matter?" said Sir Anthony to himself. And he stood still.

"The queen is dead!" shouted the messenger, swaying in his saddle.

The knight stared.

"Ay, sure!" he ejaculated after a while. And he took off his hat. "Is
it true, man?"

"As true as that I left London yesterday afternoon and have never
drawn rein since!" swore the knave, who had been three days on the
road, and had drunk at every hostel and at half the manor-houses
between London and Oxford.

"God rest her soul!" said Sir Anthony piously, still in somewhat of a
maze. "And do you come in! Come in, man, and take something."

But the messenger had got his formula by heart, and was not to be
defrauded of any part of it.

"God save the queen!" he shouted. And out of respect for the knight,
he slipped from his saddle and promptly fell on his back in the road.

"Ay, to be sure, God save the queen!" echoed Sir Anthony, taking off
his hat again. "You are right, man!" Then he hurried on, not noticing
the messenger's mishap. The tidings he had heard seemed of such
importance, and he was so anxious to tell them to his household--for
the greatest men have weaknesses, and news such as this comes seldom
in a lifetime--that he strode on to the house, and over the drawbridge
into the courtyard, without once looking behind him.

He loved order and decent observance. But there are times when a cat,
to get to the cream-pan, will wet its feet. He stood now in the middle
of the courtyard, and raising his voice, shouted for his daughter.
"Ho, Petronilla! do you hear, girl! Father! Father Carey! Martin
Luther! Baldwin!" and so on, until half the household were collected.
"Do you hear, all of you? The queen is dead! God rest her soul!"

"Amen!" said Father Carey, as became him, putting in his word amid the
wondering silence which followed; while Martin Luther and Baldwin, who
were washing themselves at the pump, stood with their heads dripping
and their mouths agape.

"Amen!" echoed the knight. "And long live the queen! Long live Queen
Elizabeth!" he continued, having now got his formula by heart. And he
swung his hat.

There was a cheer, a fairly loud cheer. But there was one who did not
join in it, and that was Petronilla. She, listening at her lattice
upstairs, began at once to think, as was her habit when any matter
great or small fell out, whether this would affect the fortunes of a
certain person far away. It might, it might not; she did not know. But
the doubt so far entertained her that she came down to supper with a
heightened color, not thinking in the least, poor girl, that the event
might have dire consequences for others almost as dear to her, and
nearer home.

Every year since his sudden departure a letter from Francis Cludde had
come to Coton; a meager letter, which had passed through many hands,
and reached Sir Anthony now through one channel, now through another.
The knight grumbled and swore over these letters, which never
contained an address to which an answer could be forwarded, nor said
much, save that the writer was well and sent his love and duty, and
looked to return, all being well. But, meager as they were, and loud
as he swore over them, he put them religiously away in an oak-chest in
his parlor; and another always put away for her share something else,
which was invariably inclosed--a tiny swallow's feather. The knight
never said anything about the feather; neither asked the meaning of
its presence, nor commented upon its absence when Petronilla gave him
back the letter. But for days after each of these arrivals he would
look much at his daughter, would follow her about with his eyes, be
more regular in bidding her attend him in his walk, and more
particular in seeing that she had the tidbits of the joint.

For Petronilla, it cannot be said, though I think in after times she
would have liked to make some one believe it, that she wasted away.
But she did take a more serious and thoughtful air in these days,
which she never, God bless her, lost afterward. There came from
Wootton Wawen and from Henley in Arden and from Cookhill gentlemen of
excellent estate, to woo her. But they all went away disconsolate
after drinking very deeply of Sir Anthony's ale and strong waters. And
some wondered that the good knight did not roundly take the jade to
task and see her settled.

But he did not; so possibly even in these days he had other views. I
have been told that, going up once to her little chamber to seek her,
he found a very singular ornament suspended inside her lattice. It was
no other than a common clay house-martin's nest. But it was so deftly
hung in a netted bag, and so daintily swathed in moss always green,
and the Christmas roses and snowdrops and violets and daffodils which
decked it in turn were always so pure and fresh and bright--as the
knight learned by more than one stealthy visit afterward--that, coming
down the steep steps, he could not see clearly, and stumbled against a
cook-boy, and beat him soundly for getting in his way.


To return, however. The news of the queen's death had scarcely been
well digested at Coton, nor the mass for her soul, which Father Carey
celebrated with much devotion, been properly criticised, before
another surprise fell upon the household. Two strangers arrived,
riding late one evening, and rang the great bell while all were at
supper. Baldwin and the porter went to see what it was, and brought
back a message which drew the knight from his chair, as a terrier
draws a rat.

"You are drunk!" he shouted, purple in the face, and fumbling for the
stick which usually leaned against his seat ready for emergencies.
"How dare you bring cock-and-bull stories to me?"

"It is true enough!" muttered Baldwin sullenly: a stout, dour man, not
much afraid of his master, but loving him exceedingly. "I knew him
again myself."

Sir Anthony strode firmly out of the room, and in the courtyard near
the great gate found a man and a woman standing in the dusk. He walked
up to the former and looked him in the face. "What do you here?" he
said, in a strange, hard voice.

"I want shelter for a night for myself and my wife; a meal and some
words with you--no more," was the answer. "Give me this," the stranger
continued, "which every idle passer-by may claim at Coton End, and you
shall see no more of me, Anthony."

For a moment the knight seemed to hesitate. Then he answered, pointing
sternly with his hand, "There is the hall and supper. Go and eat and
drink. Or, stay!" he resumed. And he turned and gave some orders to
Baldwin, who went swiftly to the hall, and in a moment came again.
"Now go! What you want the servants will prepare for you."

"I want speech of you," said the newcomer.

Sir Anthony seemed about to refuse, but thought better of it. "You can
come to my room when you have supped," he said, in the same ungracious
tone, speaking with his eyes averted.

"And you--do you not take supper?"

"I have finished," said the knight, albeit he had eaten little. And he
turned on his heel.

Very few of those who sat round the table and watched with
astonishment the tall stranger's entrance knew him again. It was
thirteen years since Ferdinand Cludde had last sat there; sitting
there of right. And the thirteen years had worked much change in him.
When he found that Petronilla, obeying her father's message, had
disappeared, he said haughtily that his wife would sup in her own
room; and with a flashing eye and curling lip, bade Baldwin see to it.
Then, seating himself in a place next Sir Anthony's, he looked down
the board at which all sat silent. His sarcastic eye, his high
bearing, his manner--the manner of one who had gone long with his life
in his hand--awed these simple folk. Then, too, he was a Cludde.
Father Carey was absent that evening. Martin Luther had one of those
turns, half-sick, half-sullen, which alternated with his moods of
merriment; and kept his straw pallet in some corner or other. There
was no one to come between the servants and this dark-visaged
stranger, who was yet no stranger.

He had his way and his talk with Sir Anthony; the latter lasting far
into the night and producing odd results. In the first place, the
unbidden guest and his wife stayed on over next day, and over many
days to come, and seemed gradually to grow more and more at home. The
knight began to take long walks and rides with his brother, and from
each walk and ride came back with a more gloomy face and a curter
manner. Petronilla, his companion of old, found herself set aside for
her uncle, and cast, for society, on Ferdinand's wife, the strange
young woman with the brilliant eyes, whose odd changes from grave to
gay rivaled Martin Luther's; and who now scared the girl by wild
laughter and wilder gibes, and now moved her to pity by fits of
weeping or dark moods of gloom. That Uncle Ferdinand's wife stood in
dread of her husband, Petronilla soon learned, and even began to share
this dread, to shrink from his presence, and to shut herself up more
and more closely in her own chamber.

There was another, too, who grew to be troubled about this time, and
that was Father Carey. The good-natured, easy priest received with joy
and thankfulness the news that Ferdinand Cludde had seen his errors
and re-entered the fold. But when he had had two or three interviews
with the convert, his brow, too, grew clouded, and his mind troubled.
He learned to see that the accession of the young Protestant queen
must bear fruit for which he had a poor appetite. He began to spend
many hours in the church--the church which he had known all his
life--and wrestled much with himself--if his face were any index to
his soul. Good, kindly man, he was not of the stuff of which martyrs
are made; and to be forced, pushed on, and goaded into becoming a
martyr against one's will--well, the Father's position was a hard one.
As was that in those days of many a good and learned clergyman bred in
one church, and bidden suddenly, on pain of losing his livelihood, if
not his life, to migrate to another.

The visitors had been in the house a month--and in that month an
observant eye might have noted much change, though all things in
seeming went on as before--when the queen's orders enjoining all
priests to read the service, or a great part of it, in English, came
down, being forwarded by the sheriff to Father Carey. The missive
arrived on a Friday, and had been indeed long expected.

"What shall you do?" Ferdinand asked Sir Anthony.

"As before!" the tall old man replied, gripping his staff more firmly.
It was no new subject between them. A hundred times they had discussed
it already, even as they were now discussing it on the terrace by the
fish-pool, with the church which adjoins the house full in view across
the garden. "I will have no mushroom faith at Coton End," the knight
continued warmly. "It sprang up under King Henry, and how long did it
last? A year or two. It came in again under King Edward, and how long
did it last? A year or two. So it will be again. It will not last,
Ferdinand."

"I am of that mind," the younger man answered, nodding his head
gravely.

"Of course you are!" Sir Anthony rejoined, as he rested one hand on
the sundial. "For ten generations our forefathers have worshiped in
that church after the old fashion--and shall it be changed in my day?
Heaven forbid! The old fashion did for my fathers; it shall do for me.
Why, I would as soon expect that the river yonder should flow backward
as that the church which has stood for centuries, and more years to
the back of them than I can count, should be swept away by these Hot
Gospelers! I will have none of them! I will have no new-fangled ways
at Coton End!"

"Well, I think you are right!" the younger brother said. By what means
he had brought the knight to this mind without committing himself more
fully, I cannot tell. Yet so it was. Ferdinand showed himself always
the cautious doubter. Father Carey even must have done him that
justice. But--and this was strange--the more doubtful he showed
himself, the more stubborn grew his brother. There are men so shrewd
as to pass off stones for bread; and men so simple-minded as to take
something less than the word for the deed.

"Why should it come in our time?" cried Sir Anthony fractiously.

"Why indeed?" quoth the subtle one.

"I say, why should it come now? I have heard and read of the sect
called Lollards who gave trouble a while ago. But they passed, and the
church stood. So will these Gospelers pass, and the church will
stand."

"That is our experience certainly," said Ferdinand.

"I hate change!" the old man continued, his eyes on the old church,
the old timbered house--for only the gateway tower at Coton is of
stone--the old yew trees in the churchyard. "I do not believe in it,
and, what is more, I will not have it. As my fathers have worshiped,
so will I, though it cost me every rood of land! A fig for the Order
in Council!"

"If you really will not change with the younger generations----"

"I will not!" replied the old knight sharply. "There is an end of it!"

To-day the Reformed Church in England has seen many an anniversary,
and grown stronger with each year; and we can afford to laugh at Sir
Anthony's arguments. We know better than he did, for the proof of the
pudding is in the eating. But in him and his fellows, who had only the
knowledge of their own day, such arguments were natural enough. All
time, all experience, all history and custom and habit, as known to
them, were on their side. Only it was once again to be the battle of
David and the Giant of Gath.

Sir Anthony had said, "There is an end of it!" But his companion, as
he presently strolled up to the house with a smile on his saturnine
face, well knew that this was only the beginning of it. This was
Friday.


On the Sunday, a rumor of the order having gone abroad, a larger
congregation than usual streamed across the Chase to church, prepared
to hear some new thing. They were disappointed. Sir Anthony stalked in
as of old, through the double ranks of people waiting at the door to
receive him; and after him Ferdinand and his wife, and Petronilla and
Baldwin, and every servant from the house save a cook or two and the
porter. The church was full. Seldom had such a congregation been seen
in it. But all passed as of old. Father Carey's hand shook, indeed,
and his voice quavered; but he went through the ceremony of the mass,
and all was done in Latin. A little change would have been pleasant,
some thought. But no one in this country place on the borders of the
forest held very strong views. No bishop had come heretic-hunting to
Coton End. No abbey existed to excite dislike by its extravagance or
by its license or by the swarm of ragged idlers it supported. Father
Carey was the most harmless and kindest of men. The villagers did not
care one way or the other. To them Sir Anthony was king. And if any
one felt tempted to interfere, the old knight's face, as he gazed
steadfastly at the brass effigy of a Cludde, who had fallen in Spain
fighting against the Moors, warned the meddler to be silent.

And so on that Sunday all went well. But some one must have told
tales, for early in the week there came a strong letter of
remonstrance from the sheriff, who was an old friend of Sir Anthony,
and of his own free will, I fancy, would have winked. But he was
committed to the Protestants, and bound to stand or fall with them.
The choleric knight sent back an answer by the same messenger. The
sheriff replied, the knight rejoined--having his brother always at his
elbow. The upshot of the correspondence was an announcement on the
part of the sheriff that he should send his officers to the next
service, to see that the queen's order was obeyed; and a reply on the
part of Sir Anthony that he should as certainly put the men in the
duck-pond. Some inkling of this state of things got abroad, and spread
as a September fire flies through a wood; so that there was like to be
such a congregation at the next service to witness the trial of
strength, as would throw the last Sunday's gathering altogether into
the shade.

It was clear at last that Sir Anthony himself did not think that here
was the end of it. For on that Saturday afternoon he took a remarkable
walk. He called Petronilla after dinner, and bade her get her hood
and come with him. And the girl, who had seen so little of her father
in the last month, and who, what with rumors and fears and surmises,
was eating her heart out, obeyed him with joy. It was a fine frosty
day near the close of December. Sir Anthony led the way over the
plank-bridge which crossed the moat in the rear of the house, and
tramped steadily through the home farm toward a hill called the
Woodman's View, which marked the border of the forest. He did not
talk, but neither was he sunk in reverie. As he entered each field he
stood and scanned it, at times merely nodding, at times smiling, or
again muttering a few words such as, "The three-acre piece! My father
inclosed it!" or, "That is where Ferdinand killed the old mare!" or,
"The best land for wheat on this side of the house!" The hill climbed,
he stood a long time gazing over the landscape, eying first the fields
and meadows which stretched away from his feet toward the house; the
latter, as seen from this point, losing all its stateliness in the
mass of stacks and ricks and barns and granaries which surrounded it.
Then his eyes traveled farther in the same line to the broad expanse
of woodland--Coton Chase--through which the road passed along a ridge
as straight as an arrow. To the right were more fields, and here and
there amid them a homestead with its smaller ring of stacks and barns.
When he turned to the left, his eyes, passing over the shoulders of
Barnt Hill and Mill Head Copse and Beacon Hill, all bulwarks of the
forest, followed the streak of river as it wound away toward Stratford
through luscious flood meadows, here growing wide, and there narrow,
as the woodland advanced or retreated.

"It is all mine," he said, as much to himself as to the girl. "It is
all Cludde land as far as you can see."

There were tears in her eyes, and she had to turn away to conceal
them. Why, she hardly knew. For he said nothing more, and he walked
down the hill dry-eyed. But all the way home he still looked sharply
about, noting this or that, as if he were bidding farewell to the old
familiar objects, the spinneys and copses--ay, and the very gates and
gaps and the hollow trees where the owls built. It was the saddest and
most pathetic walk the girl had ever taken. Yet there was nothing
said.




                            CHAPTER XXIII.

                            THE LAST MASS.


The north wall of the church at Coton End is only four paces from the
house, the church standing within the moat. Isolated as the sacred
building, therefore, is from the outer world by the wide-spreading
Chase, and close-massed with the homestead, Sir Anthony had some
excuse for considering it as much a part of his demesne as the mill or
the smithy. In words he would have been willing to admit a
distinction; but in thought I fancy he lumped it with the rest of his
possessions.

It was with a lowering eye that on this Sunday morning he watched from
his room over the gateway the unusual stream of people making for the
church. Perchance he had in his mind other Sundays--Sundays when he
had walked out at this hour, light of heart and kind of eye, with his
staff in his fist and his glove dangling, and his dog at his heels;
and, free from care, had taken pleasure in each bonnet doffed and
each old wife's "God bless ye, Sir Anthony!" Well, those days were
gone. Now the rain dripped from the eaves--for a thaw had come in the
night--and the bells, that could on occasion ring so cheerily, sounded
sad and forlorn. His daughter, when she came, according to custom,
bringing his great service-book, could scarcely look him in the face.
I know not whether even then his resolution to dare all might not, at
sound of a word from her, or at sight of her face, have melted like
yesterday's ice. But before the word could be spoken, or the eyes
meet, another step rang on the stone staircase and brother Ferdinand
entered.

"They are here!" he said in a low voice. "Six of them, Anthony, and
sturdy fellows, as all Clopton's men are. If you do not think your
people will stand by you----"

The knight fired at this suggestion. "What!" he burst out, turning
from the window, "if Cludde men cannot meet Clopton men the times are
indeed gone mad! Make way and let me come! Though the mass be never
said again in Coton church, it shall be said to-day!" And he swore a
great oath.

He strode down the stairs and under the gateway, where were arranged,
according to the custom of the house on wet days, all the servants,
with Baldwin and Martin Luther at their head. The knight stalked
through them with a gloomy brow. His brother followed him, a faint
smile flickering about the corners of his mouth. Then came Ferdinand's
wife and Petronilla, the latter with her hood drawn close about her
face, Anne with her chin in the air and her eyes aglow. "It is not a
bit of a bustle will scare her!" Baldwin muttered, as he fell in
behind her, and eyed her back with no great favor.

"No--so long as it does not touch her," Martin replied in a cynical
whisper. "She is well mated! Well mated and ill fated! Ha! ha!"

"Silence, fool," growled his companion angrily. "Is this a time for
antics?"

"Ay, it is!" Martin retorted swiftly, though with the same caution.
"For when wise men turn fools, fools are put to it to act up to their
profession! You see, brother?" And he deliberately cut a caper. His
eyes were glittering, and the nerves on one side of his face twitched
oddly. Baldwin looked at him, and muttered that Martin was going to
have one of his mad fits. What had grown on the fool of late?

The knight reached the church porch and passed through the crowd which
awaited him there. Save for its unusual size and some strange faces to
be seen on its skirts, there was no indication of trouble. He walked,
tapping his stick on the pavement a little more loudly than usual, to
his place in the front pew. The household, the villagers, the
strangers, pressed in behind him until every seat was filled. Even the
table monument of Sir Piers Cludde, which stood lengthwise in the
aisle, was seized upon, and if the two similar monuments which stood
to right and left below the chancel steps had not been under the
knight's eyes, they too would have been invaded. Yet all was done
decently and in order, with a clattering of rustic boots indeed, but
no scrambling or ill words. The Clopton men were there. Baldwin had
marked them well, and so had a dozen stout fellows, sons of Sir
Anthony's tenants. But they behaved, discreetly, and amid such a
silence as Father Carey never remembered to have faced, he began the
Roman service.


The December light fell faintly through the east window on the Father
at his ministrations, on his small acolytes, on the four Cludde
brasses before the altar. It fell everywhere--on gray dusty walls
buttressed by gray tombs which left but a narrow space in the middle
of the chancel. The marble crusader to the left matched the canopied
bed of Sir Anthony's parents on the right; the Abbess's tomb in the
next row faced the plainer monument of Sir Anthony's wife, a vacant
place by her side awaiting his own effigy. And there were others. The
chancel was so small--nay, the church too--so small and old and gray
and solid, and the tombs were so massive, that they elbowed one
another. The very dust which rose as men stirred was the dust of
Cluddes. Sir Anthony's brow relaxed. He listened gravely and sadly.

And then the interruption came. "I protest!" a rough voice in rear of
the crowd cried suddenly, ringing harshly and strangely above the
Father's accents and the solemn hush. "I protest against this
service!"

A thrill of astonishment ran through the crowd, and all rose. Every
man in the church turned round, Sir Anthony among the first, and
looked in the direction of the voice. Then it was seen that the
Clopton men had massed themselves about the door in the southwest
corner--a strong position, whence retreat was easy. Father Carey,
after a momentary glance, went on as if he had not heard; but his
voice shook, and all still waited with their faces turned toward the
west end.

"I protest in the name of the Queen!" the same man cried sharply,
while his fellows raised a murmur so that the priest's voice was
drowned.

Sir Anthony stepped into the aisle, his face inflamed with anger. The
interruption taking place there, in that place, seemed to him a double
profanation.

"Who is that brawler?" he said, his hand trembling on his staff; and
all the old dames trembled too. "Let him stand out."

The sheriff's spokesman was so concealed by his fellows that he could
not be seen; but he answered civilly enough.

"I am no brawler," he said. "I only require the law to be observed;
and that you know, sir. I am here on behalf of the sheriff; and I warn
all present that a continuation of this service will expose them to
grievous pains and penalties. If you desire it, I will read the royal
order to prove that I do not speak without warrant."

"Begone, knave, you and your fellows!" Sir Anthony cried. A loyal man
in all else, and the last to deny the queen's right or title, he had
no reasonable answer to give, and could only bluster. "Begone, do you
hear?" he repeated; and he rapped his staff on the pavement, and then,
raising it, pointed to the door.

All Coton thought the men must go; but the men, perhaps, because they
were Clopton, did not go. And Sir Anthony had not so completely lost
his head as to proceed to extremities except in the last resort.
Affecting to consider the incident at an end, he stepped back into his
pew without waiting to see whether the man obeyed him or no, and
resumed his devotions. Father Carey, at a nod from him, went on with
the interrupted service.

But again the priest had barely read a dozen lines before the same man
made the congregation start by crying loudly, "Stop!"

"Go on!" shouted Sir Anthony in a voice of thunder.

"At your peril!" retorted the intervener.

"Go on!" from Sir Anthony again.

Father Carey stood silent, trembling and looking from one to the
other. Many a priest of his faith would have risen on the storm and in
the spirit of Hildebrand hurled his church's curse at the intruder.
But the Father was not of these, and he hesitated, fumbling with his
surplice with his feeble white hands. He feared as much for his patron
as for himself; and it was on the knight that his eyes finally rested.
But Sir Anthony's brow was black; he got no comfort there. So the
Father took courage and a long breath, opened his mouth and read on,
amid the hush of suppressed excitement, and of such anger and stealthy
defiance as surely English church had never seen before. As he read,
however, he gathered courage, and his voice strength. The solemn
words, so ancient, so familiar, fell on the stillness of the church,
and awed even the sheriff's men. To the surprise of nearly every one,
there was no further interruption; the service ended quietly.

So after all Sir Anthony had his way, and stalked out, stiff and
unbending. Nor was there any falling off, but rather an increase in
the respect with which his people rose, according to custom, as he
passed. Yet under that increase of respect lay a something which cut
the old man to the heart. He saw that his dependents pitied him while
they honored him; that they thought him a fool for running his head
against a stone wall--as Martin Luther put it--even while they felt
that there was something grand in it too.

During the rest of the day he went about his usual employments, but
probably with little zest. He had done what he had done without any
very clear idea how he was going to proceed. Between his loyalty in
all else and his treason in this, it would not have been easy for a
Solomon to choose a consistent path. And Sir Anthony was no Solomon.
He chose at last to carry himself as if there were no danger--as if
the thing which had happened were unimportant. He ordered no change
and took no precautions. He shut his ears to the whispering which went
on among the servants, and his eyes to the watch which by some secret
order of Baldwin was kept upon the Ridgeway.

It was something of a shock to him, therefore, when his daughter came
to him after breakfast next morning, looking pale and heavy-eyed, and,
breaking through the respect which had hitherto kept her silent,
begged him to go away.

"To go away?" he cried. He rose from his oak chair and glared at her.
Then his feelings found their easiest vent in anger. "What do you
mean, girl?" he blustered, "Go away? Go where?"

But she did not quail. Indeed she had her suggestion ready.

"To the Mere Farm in the Forest, sir," she answered earnestly. "They
will not look for you there; and Martin says----"

"Martin? The fool!"

His face grew redder and redder. This was too much. He loved order and
discipline; and to be advised in such matters by a woman and a fool!
It was intolerable!

"Go to, girl!" he cried, fuming. "I wondered where you had got your
tale so pat. So you and the fool have been putting your heads
together! Go! Go and spin, and leave these maters to men! Do you think
that my brother, after traveling the world over, has not got a head on
his shoulders? Do you think, if there were danger, he and I would not
have foreseen it?"

He waved his hand and turned away expecting her to go. But Petronilla
did not go. She had something else to say and though the task was
painful she was resolved to say it.

"Father, one word," she murmured. "About my uncle."

"Well, well! What about him?"

"I distrust him, sir," she ventured, in a low tone, her color rising.
"The servants do not like him. They fear him, and suspect him of I
know not what."

"The servants!" Sir Anthony answered in an awful tone.

Indeed it was not the wisest thing she could have said; but the
consequences were averted by a sudden alarm and shouting outside. Half
a dozen voices, shrill or threatening, seemed to rise at once. The
knight strode to the window, but the noise appeared to come, not from
the Chase upon which it looked, but from the courtyard or the rear of
the house. Sir Anthony caught up his stick, and, followed by the girl,
ran down the steps. He pushed aside half a dozen women who had
likewise been attracted by the noise, and hastened through the narrow
passage which led to the wooden bridge in the rear of the buildings.

Here, in the close on the far side of the moat, a strange scene was
passing. A dozen horsemen were grouped in the middle of the field
about a couple of prisoners, while round the gate by which they had
entered stood as many stout men on foot, headed by Baldwin and armed
with pikes and staves. These seemed to be taunting the cavaliers and
daring them to come on. On the wooden bridge by which the knight stood
were half a dozen of the servants, also armed. Sir Anthony recognized
in the leading horseman Sir Philip Clopton, and in the prisoners
Father Carey and one of the woodmen; and in a moment he comprehended
what had happened.

The sheriff, in the most unneighborly manner, instead of challenging
his front door, had stolen up to the rear of the house, and, without
saying with your leave or by your leave, had snapped up the poor
priest, who happened to be wandering in that direction. Probably he
had intended to force an entrance; but he had laid aside the plan when
he saw his only retreat menaced by the watchful Baldwin, who was not
to be caught napping. The knight took all this in at a glance, and his
gorge rose as much at the Clopton men's trick as at the danger in
which Father Carey stood. So he lost his head, and made matters worse.
"Who are these villains," he cried in a rage, his face aflame, "who
come attacking men's houses in time of peace? Begone, or I will have
at ye!"

"Sir Anthony!" Clopton cried, interrupting him, "in Heaven's name do
not carry the thing farther! Give me way in the Queen's name, and I
will----"


What he would do was never known, for at that last word, away at the
house, behind Sir Anthony, there was a puff of smoke, and down went
the sheriff headlong, horse and man, while the report of an arquebuse
rang dully round the buildings. The knight gazed horrified; but the
damage was done and could not be undone. Nay, more, the Coton men took
the sound for a signal. With a shout, before Sir Anthony could
interfere, they made a dash for the group of horsemen. The latter,
uncertain and hampered by the fall of their leader, who was not hit,
but was stunned beyond giving orders, did the best they could. They
let their prisoners go with a curse, and then, raising Sir Philip and
forming a rough line, they charged toward the gate by which they had
entered.

The footmen stood the brunt gallantly, and for a moment the sharp
ringing of quarter-staves and the shivering of steel told of as pretty
a combat as ever took place on level sward in full view of an English
home. The spectators could see Baldwin doing wonders. His men backed
him up bravely. But in the end the impetus of the horses told, the
footmen gave way and fled aside, and the strangers passed them. A
little more skirmishing took place at the gateway, Sir Anthony's men
being deaf to all his attempts to call them off; and then the Clopton
horse got clear, and, shaking their fists and vowing vengeance, rode
off toward the forest. They left two of their men on the field,
however, one with a broken arm and one with a shattered knee-cap;
while the house party, on their side, beside sundry knocks and
bruises, could show one deep sword-cut, a broken wrist, and half a
dozen nasty wounds.

"My poor little girl!" Sir Anthony whispered to himself, as he gazed
with scared eyes at the prostrate men and the dead horse, and
comprehended what had happened. "This is a hanging business! In arms
against the Queen! What am I to do?" And as he went back to the house
in a kind of stupor, he muttered again, "My little girl! my poor
little girl!"

I fancy that in this terrible crisis he looked to get support and
comfort from his brother--that old campaigner, who had seen so many
vicissitudes and knew by heart so many shifts. But Ferdinand, though
he thought the event unlucky, had little to say and less to suggest;
and seemed, indeed, to have become on a sudden flaccid and lukewarm.
Sir Anthony felt himself thrown on his own resources. "Who fired the
shot?" he asked, looking about the room in a dazed fashion. "It was
that which did the mischief," he continued, forgetting his own hasty
challenge.

"I think it must have been Martin Luther," Ferdinand answered.

But Martin Luther, when he was accused, denied this stoutly. He had
been so far along the Ridgeway, he said, that though he had returned
at once on hearing the shot fired, he had arrived too late for the
fight. The fool's stomach for a fight was so well known that this
seemed probable enough, and though some still suspected him, the
origin of the unfortunate signal was never clearly determined, though
in after days shrewd guesses were made by some.

For a few hours it seemed as if Sir Anthony had sunk into his former
state of indecision. But when Petronilla came again to him soon after
noon to beg him to go into hiding, she found his mood had altered. "Go
to the Mere Farm?" he said, not angrily now, but firmly and quietly.
"No, girl, I cannot. I have been in fault, and I must stay and pay for
it. If I left these poor fellows to bear the brunt, I could never hold
up my head again. But do you go now and tell Baldwin to come to me."

She went and told the stern, down-looking steward, and he came up.

"Baldwin," said the knight when the door was shut, and the two were
alone, "you are to dismiss to their homes all the tenants--who have
indeed been called out without my orders. Bid them go and keep the
peace, and I hope they will not be molested. For you and Father Carey,
you must go into hiding. The Mere Farm will be best."

"And what of you, Sir Anthony?" the steward asked, amazed at this act
of folly.

"I shall remain here," the knight replied with dignity.

"You will be taken," said Baldwin, after a pause.

"Very well," said the knight.

The man shrugged his shoulders, and was silent.

"What do you mean?" asked Sir Anthony in anger.

"Why, just that I cannot do it," Baldwin answered, glowering at him
with a flush on his dark cheek. "That is what I mean. Let the priest
go. I cannot go, and will not."

"Then you will be hanged!" quoth the knight warmly. "You have been in
arms against the Queen, you fool! You will be hanged as sure as you
stay here!"

"Then I shall be hanged," replied the steward sullenly. "There never
was a Cludde hanged yet without one to keep him company. To hear of it
would make my grandsire turn in his grave out there. I dare not do it,
Sir Anthony, and that is the fact. But for the rest I will do as you
bid me."

And he had his way. But never had evening fallen more strangely and
sadly at Coton before. The rain pattered drearily in the courtyard.
The drawbridge, by Baldwin's order, had been pulled up, and the planks
over the moat in the rear removed.

"They shall not steal upon us again!" he muttered. "And if we must
surrender, they shall see we do it willingly."

The tenants had gone to their homes and their wives. Only the servants
remained. They clustered, solemn and sorrowful, about the hearth in
the great hall, starting if a dog howled without or a coal flew from
the fire within. Sir Anthony remained brooding in his own room,
Petronilla sitting beside him silent and fearful, while Ferdinand and
his wife moved restlessly about, listening to the wind. But the
evening and the night wore peacefully away, and so, to the surprise of
everybody, did the next day and the next. Could the sheriff be going
to overlook the matter? Alas! on the third day the doubt was resolved.
Two or three boys, who had been sent out as scouts, came in with news
that there was a strong watch set on the Ridgeway, that the paths
through the forest were guarded, that bodies of armed men were
arriving in the neighboring villages, and that soldiers had been
demanded--or so it was said--from Warwick and Worcester, and even from
a place as far away as Oxford. Probably it was only the sheriff's
prudence which had postponed the crisis; and now it had come. The net
was drawn all round. As the day closed in on Coton and the sun set
angrily among the forest trees, the boys' tale, which grew no doubt in
the telling, passed from one to another, and men swore and looked out
of window, and women wept in corners. In the Tower-room Sir Anthony
sat awaiting the summons, and wondered what he could to save his
daughter from possible rudeness, or even hurt, at the hands of these
strangers.

There was one man missing from hall and kitchen, but few in the
suspense noticed his absence. The fool had heard the boys' story, and,
unable to remain inactive under such excitement, he presently stole
off in the dusk to the rear of the house. Here he managed to cross the
moat by means of a plank, which he then drew over and hid in the
grass. This quietly managed--Baldwin, be it said, had strictly
forbidden any one to leave the house--Martin made off with a grim
chuckle toward the forest, and following the main track leading toward
Wootton Wawen, presently came among the trees upon a couple of
sentinels. They heard him, saw him indistinctly, and made a rush for
him. But this was just the sport Martin liked, and the fun he had come
for. His quick ear apprised him of the danger, and in a second he was
lost in the underwood, his mocking laugh and shrill taunts keeping the
poor men on the shudder for the next ten minutes. Then the uncanny
accents died away, and, satisfied with his sport and the knowledge he
had gained, the fool made for home. As he sped quickly across the last
field, however, he was astonished by the sight of a dark figure in the
very act of launching his--Martin's--plank across the moat.

"Ho, ho!" the fool muttered in a fierce undertone. "That is it, is it?
And only one! If they will come one by one, like the plums in the
kitchen porridge, I shall make a fine meal!"

He stood back, crouching down on the grass, and watched the unknown,
his eyes glittering. The stranger was a tall, big fellow, a formidable
antagonist. But Martin cared nothing for that. Had he not his long
knife, as keen as his wits--when they were at home, which was not
always. He drew it out now, and under cover of the darkness crept
nearer and nearer, his blood glowing pleasantly, though the night was
cold. How lucky it was he had come out! He could hardly restrain the
"Ho, ho!" which rose to his lips. He meant to leap upon the man on
this side of the water, that there might be no tell-tale traces on the
farther bank.

But the stranger was too quick for him in this. He got his bridge
fixed, and began to cross before Martin could crawl near enough. As he
crossed, however, his feet made a slight noise on the plank, and under
cover of it the fool rose and ran forward, then followed him over with
the stealthiness of a cat. And like a cat too, the moment the
stranger's foot touched the bank, Martin sprang on him with his knife
raised--sprang on him silently, with his teeth grinning and his eyes
aflame.




                            CHAPTER XXIV.

                          AWAITING THE BLOW.


A moment later the servants in the hall heard a scream--a scream of
such horror and fear that they scarcely recognized a human voice in
the sound. They sprang to their feet scared and trembling, and for a
few seconds looked into one another's faces. Then, as curiosity got
the upper hand, the boldest took the lead and all hurried pell-mell to
the door, issuing in a mob into the courtyard, where Ferdinand Cludde,
who happened to be near and had also heard the cry, joined them.
"Where was it, Baldwin?" he exclaimed.

"At the back, I think," the steward answered. He alone had had the
coolness to bring out a lantern, and he now led the way toward the
rear of the house. Sure enough, close to the edge of the moat, they
found Martin, stooping with his hands on his knees, a great wound,
half bruise, half cut, upon his forehead. "What is it?" Ferdinand
cried sharply. "Who did it, man?"

Baldwin had already thrown his light on the fool's face, and Martin,
seeming to become conscious of their presence, looked at them, but in
a dazed fashion. "What?" he muttered, "what is what?"

By this time nearly every one in the house had hurried to the spot;
among them not only Petronilla, clinging to her father's arm, but
Mistress Anne, her face pale and gloomy, and half a dozen womenfolk
who clutched one another tightly, and screamed at regular intervals.

"What is it?" Baldwin repeated roughly, laying his hand on Martin's
arm and slightly shaking him. "Come, who struck you, man?"

"I think," the fool answered slowly, gulping down something and
turning a dull eye on the group; "a--a swallow flew by--and hit me!"

They shrank away from him instinctively and some crossed themselves.
"He is in one of his mad fits," Baldwin muttered. Still the steward
showed no fear. "A swallow, man!" he cried aloud. "Come, talk sense.
There are no swallows flying at this time of year. And if there were,
they do not fly by night, nor give men wounds like that. What was it?
Out with it, now. Do you not see, man," he added, giving Martin an
impatient shake, "that Sir Anthony is waiting?"

The fool nodded stupidly. "A swallow," he muttered. "Ay, 'twas a
swallow, a great big swallow. I--I nearly put my foot on him."

"And he flew up and hit you in the face?" Baldwin said, with huge
contempt in his tone.

Martin accepted the suggestion placidly. "Ay, 'twas so. A great big
swallow, and he flew in my face," he repeated.

Sir Anthony looked at him compassionately. "Poor fellow!" he said;
"Baldwin, see to him. He has had one of his fits and hurt himself."

"I never knew him hurt _himself_," Baldwin muttered darkly.

"Let somebody see to him," the knight said, disregarding the
interruption. "And now come, Petronilla. Why--where has the girl
gone?"


Not far. Only round to the other side of him, that she might be a
little nearer to Martin. The curiosity in the other women's faces was
a small thing in comparison with the startled, earnest look in hers.
She gazed at the man with eyes not of affright, but of eager, avid
questioning, while through her parted lips her breath came in gasps.
Her cheek was red and white by turns, and, for her heart--well, it had
seemed to stand still a moment, and now was beating like the heart of
some poor captured bird held in the hand. She did not seem to hear her
father speak to her, and he had to touch her sleeve. Then she started
as though she were awakening from a dream, and followed him sadly into
the house.

Sadly, and yet there was a light in her eyes which had not been there
five minutes before. A swallow? A great big swallow? And this was
December, when the swallows were at the bottom of the horse-ponds. She
only knew of one swallow whose return was possible in winter. But then
that one swallow--ay, though the snow should lie inches deep in the
chase, and the water should freeze in her room--would make a summer
for her. Could it be that one? Could it be? Petronilla's heart was
beating so loudly as she went upstairs after her father, that she
wondered he did not hear it.


The group left round Martin gradually melted away. Baldwin was the
only man who could deal with him in his mad fits, and the other
servants, with a shudder and a backward glance, gladly left him to the
steward. Mistress Anne had gone in some time. Only Ferdinand Cludde
remained, and he stood a little apart, and seemed more deeply engaged
in listening for any sound which might betoken the sheriff's approach
than in hearkening to their conversation. Listen as he might he would
have gained little from the latter, for it was made up entirely of
scolding on one side and stupid reiteration on the other. Yet
Ferdinand, ever suspicious and on his guard, must have felt some
interest in it, for he presently called the steward to him. "Is he
more fool or knave?" he muttered, pointing under hand at Martin, who
stood in the gloom a few paces away.

Baldwin shrugged his shoulders, but remained silent. "What happened?
What is the meaning of it all?" Ferdinand persisted, his keen eyes on
the steward's face. "Did he do it himself? Or who did it?"

Baldwin turned slowly and nodded toward the moat. "I expect you will
find him who did it there," he said grimly. "I never knew a man save
Sir Anthony or Master Francis hit Martin yet, but he paid for it. And
when his temper is up, he is mad, or as good as mad; and better than
two sane men!"

"He is a dangerous fellow," Ferdinand said thoughtfully, shivering a
little. It was unlike him to shiver and shake. But the bravest have
their moods.

"Dangerous?" the steward answered. "Ay, he is to some, and sometimes."

Ferdinand Cludde looked sharply at the speaker, as if he suspected him
of a covert sneer. But Baldwin's gloomy face betrayed no glint of
intelligence or amusement, and the knight's brother, reassured and yet
uneasy, turned on his heel and went into the house, meeting at the
door a servant who came to tell him that Sir Anthony was calling for
him. Baldwin Moor, left alone, stood a moment thinking, and then
turned to speak to Martin. But Martin was gone, and was nowhere to be
seen.

The lights in the hall windows twinkled cheerily, and the great fire
cast its glow half way across the courtyard, as lights and fire had
twinkled and glowed at Coton End on many a night before. But neither
in hall nor chamber was there any answering merriment. Baldwin, coming
in, cursed the servants who were in his way, and the men moved meekly
and without retort, taking his oaths for what they were--a man's
tears. The women folk sat listening pale and frightened, and one or
two of the grooms, those who had done least in the skirmish, had
visions of a tree and a rope, and looked sickly. The rest scowled and
blinked at the fire, or kicked up a dog if it barked in its sleep.

"Hasn't Martin come in?" Baldwin growled presently, setting his heavy
wet boot on a glowing log, which hissed and sputtered under it. "Where
is he?"

"Don't know!" one of the men took on himself to answer. "He did not
come in here."

"I wonder what he is up to now?" Baldwin exclaimed, with gloomy
irritation; for which, under the circumstances, he had ample excuse.
He knew that resistance was utterly hopeless, and could only make
matters worse, and twist the rope more tightly about his neck, to put
the thought as he framed it. The suspicion, therefore, that this
madman--for such in his worst fits the fool became--might be hanging
round the place in dark corners, doing what deadly mischief he could
to the attacking party, was not a pleasant one.

A gray-haired man in the warmest nook by the fire seemed to read his
thoughts. "There is one in the house," he said slowly and oracularly,
his eyes on Baldwin's boot, "whom he has just as good a mind to hurt,
has our Martin, as any of them Clopton men. Ay, that has he, Master
Baldwin."

"And who is that, gaffer?" Baldwin asked contemptuously.

But the old fellow turned shy. "Well, it is not Sir Anthony," he
answered, nodding his head, and stooping forward to caress his
toasting shins. "Be you very sure of that. Nor the young mistress, nor
the young master as was, nor the new lady that came a month ago. No,
nor it is not you, Master Baldwin."

"Then who is it?" cried the steward impatiently.

"He is shrewd, is Martin--when the saints have not got their backs to
him," said the old fellow slyly.

"Who is it?" thundered the steward, well used to this rustic method of
evasion. "Answer, you dolt!"

But no answer came, and Baldwin never got one; for at this moment a
man who had been watching in front of the house ran in.

"They are here!" he cried, "a good hundred of them, and torches enough
for St. Anthony's Eve. Get you to the gate, porter, Sir Anthony is
calling for you. Do you hear?"

There was a great uprising, a great clattering of feet and barking of
dogs, and some wailing among the women. As the messenger finished
speaking, a harsh challenge which penetrated even the courtyard arose
from many voices without, and was followed by the winding of a horn.
This sufficed. All hurried with one accord into the court, where the
porter looked to Baldwin for instructions.

"Hold a minute!" cried the steward, silencing the loudest hound by a
sound kick, and disregarding Sir Anthony's voice, which came from the
direction of the gateway. "Let us see if they are at the back too."

He ran through the passage and, emerging on the edge of the moat, was
at once saluted by a dozen voices warning him back. There were a score
of dark figures standing in the little close where the fight had taken
place. "Right," said Baldwin to himself. "Needs must when the old
gentleman drives! Only I thought I would make sure."

He ran back at once, nearly knocking down Martin, who with a companion
was making, but at a slower pace, for the front of the house.

"Well, old comrade!" cried the steward, smiting the fool on the back
as he passed, "you are here, are you? I never thought that you and I
would be in at our own deaths!"

He did not notice, in the wild humor which had seized him, who
Martin's companion was, though probably at another time it would have
struck him that there was no one in the house quite so tall. He sped
on with scarcely a glance, and in a moment was under the gateway,
where Sir Anthony was soundly rating everybody, and particularly the
porter, who with his key in the door found or affected to find the
task of turning it a difficult one. As the steward came up, however,
the big doors at some sign from him creaked on their hinges, and the
knight, his staff in his hand, and the servants clustering behind him
with lanterns, walked forward a pace or two to the end of the bridge,
bearing himself with some dignity.

"Who disturbs us at this hour?" he cried, peering across the moat, and
signing to Baldwin to hold up his large lantern, since the others,
uncertain of their reception, had put out their torches. By its light
he and those behind him could make out a group of half a dozen figures
a score of yards away, while in support of these there appeared a
bowshot off, and still in the open ground, a clump of, it might be, a
hundred men. Beyond all lay the dark line of trees, above which the
moon, new-risen, was sailing through a watery wrack of clouds. "Who
are ye?" the knight repeated.

"Are you Sir Anthony Cludde?" came the answer.

"I am."

"Then in the Queen's name, Sir Anthony," the leader of the troop cried
solemnly, "I call on you to surrender. I hold a warrant for your
arrest, and also for the arrest of James Carey, a priest, and Baldwin
Moor, who, I am told, is your steward. I am backed by forces which it
will be vain to resist."

"Are you Sir Philip Clopton?" the knight asked. For at that distance
and in that light it was impossible to be sure.

"I am," the sheriff answered earnestly. "And, as a friend, I beg you,
Sir Anthony, to avoid useless bloodshed and further cause for offense.
Sir Thomas Greville, the governor of Warwick Castle, and Colonel
Bridgewater are with me. I implore you, my friend, to surrender, and I
will do you what good offices I may."

The knight, as we know, had made up his mind. And yet for a second he
hesitated. There were stern, grim faces round him, changed by the
stress of the moment into the semblance of dark Baldwin's; the faces
of men, who though they numbered but a dozen were his men, bound to
him by every tie of instinct, and breeding, and custom. And he had
been a soldier, and knew the fierce joy of a desperate struggle
against odds. Might it not be better after all?

But then he remembered his womenkind; and after all, why endanger
these faithful men? He raised his voice and cried clearly, "I accept
your good offices, Sir Philip, and I take your advice. I will have the
drawbridge lowered, only I beg you will keep your men well in hand,
and do my poor house as little damage as may be."

Giving Baldwin the order, and bidding him as soon as it was performed
come to him, the knight walked steadily back into the courtyard and
took his stand there. He dispatched the women and some of the servants
to lay out a meal in the hall. But it was noticeable that the men went
reluctantly, and that all who could find any excuse to do so lingered
round Sir Anthony as if they could not bear to abandon him; as if,
even at the last moment, they had some vague notion of protecting
their master at all hazards. A score of lanterns shed a gloomy,
uncertain light--only in places reinforced by the glow, from the hall
windows--upon the group. Seldom had a Coton moon peeped over the
gables at a scene stranger than that which met the sheriff's eyes, as
with his two backers he passed under the gateway.


"I surrender to you, Sir Philip," the knight said with dignity,
stepping forward a pace or two, "and call you to witness that I might
have made resistance and have not. My tenants are quiet in their
homes, and only my servants are present. Father Carey is not here, nor
in the house. This is Baldwin Moor, my steward, but I beg for him your
especial offices, since he has done nothing save by my command."

"Sir Anthony, believe me that I will do all I can," the sheriff
responded gravely, "but----"

"But to set at naught the Queen's proclamation and order!" struck in a
third voice harshly--it was Sir Thomas Greville's--"and she but a
month on the throne! For shame, Sir Anthony! It smacks to me of high
treason. And many a man has suffered for less, let me tell you."

"Had she been longer on the throne," the sheriff put in more gently,
"and were the times quiet, the matter would have been of less moment,
Sir Anthony, and might not have become a state matter. But just
now----"

"Things are in a perilous condition," Greville said bluntly, "and you
have done your little to make them worse!"

The knight by a great effort swallowed his rage and humiliation. "What
will you do with me, gentlemen?" he asked, speaking with at least the
appearance of calmness.

"That is to be seen," Greville said, roughly over-riding his
companion. "For to-night we must make ourselves and our men
comfortable here."

"Certainly--with Sir Anthony's leave, Sir Thomas Greville," quoth a
voice from behind. "But only so!"


More than one started violently, while the Cludde servants almost to a
man spun round at the sound of the voice--my voice, Francis Cludde's,
though in the darknesss no one knew me. How shall I ever forget the
joy and lively gratitude which filled my heart as I spoke; which
turned the night into day, and that fantastic scene of shadows into a
festival, as I felt that the ambition of the last four years was about
to be gratified. Sir Anthony, who was one of the first to turn, peered
among the servants. "Who spoke?" he cried, a sudden discomposure in
his voice and manner. "Who spoke there?"

"Ay, Sir Anthony, who did?" Greville said haughtily. "Some one
apparently who does not quite understand his place or the state of
affairs here. Stand back, my men, and let me see him. Perhaps we may
teach him a useful lesson."

The challenge was welcome, for I feared a scene, and to be left face
to face with my uncle more than anything. Now, as the servants with a
loud murmur of surprise and recognition fell back and disclosed me
standing by Martin's side, I turned a little from Sir Anthony and
faced Greville. "Not this time, I think, Sir Thomas," I said, giving
him back glance for glance. "I have learned my lesson from some who
have fared farther and seen more than you, from men who have stood by
their cause in foul weather as well as fair; and were not for mass one
day and a sermon the next."

"What is this?" he cried angrily. "Who are you?"

"Sir Anthony Cludde's dutiful and loving nephew," I answered, with a
courteous bow. "Come back, I thank Heaven, in time to do him a
service, Sir Thomas."

"Master Francis! Master Francis!" Clopton exclaimed in remonstrance.
He had known me in old days. My uncle, meanwhile, gazed at me in the
utmost astonishment, and into the servants' faces there flashed a
strange light, while many of them hailed me in a tone which told me
that I had but to give the word, and they would fall on the very
sheriff himself. "Master Francis," Sir Philip Clopton repeated
gravely, "if you would do your uncle a service, this is not the way to
go about it. He has surrendered and is our prisoner. Brawling will not
mend matters."

I laughed out loudly and merrily. "Do you know, Sir Philip," I said,
with something of the old boyish ring in my voice, "I have been, since
I saw you last, to Belgium and Germany, ay, and Poland and Hamburg! Do
you think I have come back a fool?"

"I do not know what to think of you," he replied dryly, "but you had
best----"

"Keep a civil tongue in your head, my friend!" said Greville with
harshness, "and yourself out of this business."

"It is just this business I have come to get into, Sir Thomas," I
answered, with increasing good humor. "Sir Anthony, show them that!" I
continued, and I drew out a little packet of parchment with a great
red seal hanging from it by a green ribbon; just such a packet as that
which I had stolen from the Bishop's apparitor nearly four years back.
"A lantern here!" I cried. "Hold it steady, Martin, that Sir Anthony
may read. Master Sheriff wants his rere-supper."

I gave the packet into the knight's hand, my own shaking. Ay, shaking,
for was not this the fulfillment of that boyish vow I had made in my
little room in the gable yonder, so many years ago? A fulfillment
strange and timely, such as none but a boy in his teens could have
hoped for, nor any but a man who had tried the chances and mishaps of
the world could fully enjoy as I was enjoying it. I tingled with the
rush through my veins of triumph and gratitude. Up to the last moment
I had feared lest anything should go wrong, lest this crowning
happiness should be withheld from me. Now I stood there smiling,
watching Sir Anthony, as with trembling fingers he fumbled with the
paper. And there was only one thing, only one person, wanting to my
joy. I looked, and looked again, but I could not anywhere see
Petronilla.

"What is it?" Sir Anthony said feebly, turning the packet over and
over. "It is for the sheriff; for the sheriff, is it not?"

"He had better open it then, sir," I answered gayly.

Sir Philip took the packet and after a glance at the address tore it
open. "It is an order from Sir William Cecil," he muttered. Then he
ran his eye down the brief contents, while all save myself pricked
their ears and pressed closer, and I looked swiftly from face to face,
as the wavering light lit up now one and now another. Old familiar
faces for the most part.

"Well, Sir Philip, will you stop to supper?" I cried with a laugh,
when he had had time, as I judged, to reach the signature.

"Go to!" he grunted, looking at me. "Nice fools you have made of us,
young man!" He passed the letter to Greville. "Sir Anthony," he
continued, a mixture of pleasure and chagrin in his voice, "you are
free! I congratulate you on your luck. Your nephew has brought an
amnesty for all things done up to the present time save for any life
taken, in which case the matter is to be referred to the Secretary.
Fortunately my dead horse is the worst of the mischief, so free you
are, and amnestied, though nicely Master Cecil has befooled us!"

"We will give you another horse, Sir Philip," I answered.

But the words were wasted on the air. They were drowned in a great
shout of joy and triumph which rang from a score of Cludde throats the
moment the purport of the paper was understood; a shout which made the
old house shake again, and scared the dogs so that they fled away into
corners and gazed askance at us, their tails between their legs; a
shout that was plainly heard a mile away in half a dozen homesteads
where Cludde men lay gloomy in their beds.

By this time my uncle's hand was in mine. With his other he took off
his hat. "Lads!" he cried huskily, rearing his tall form in our midst;
"a cheer for the Queen! God keep her safe, and long may she reign!"

This was universally regarded as the end of what they still proudly
call in those parts "the Coton Insurrection!" When silence came again,
every dog, even the oldest and wisest, had bayed himself hoarse and
fled to kennel, thinking the end of the world was come. My heart, as I
joined roundly in, swelled high with pride, and there were tears in my
eyes as well as in my uncle's. But there is no triumph after all
without its drawback, no fruition equal to the anticipation. Where was
Petronilla? I could see her nowhere. I looked from window to window,
but she was at none. I scanned the knot of maids, but could not find
her. Even the cheering had not brought her out.

It was wonderful, though, how the cheers cleared the air. Even Sir
Thomas Greville regained good humor, and deigned to shake me by the
hand and express himself pleased that the matter had ended so happily.
Then the sheriff drew him and Bridgewater away, to look to their men's
arrangements, seeing, I think, that my uncle and I would fain be alone
awhile; and at last I asked with a trembling voice after Petronilla.


"To be sure," Sir Anthony answered, furtively wiping his eyes. "I had
forgotten her, dear lad. I wish now that she had stayed. But tell me,
Francis, how came you back to-night, and how did you manage this?"

Something of what he asked I told him hurriedly. But then--be sure I
took advantage of the first opening--I asked again after Petronilla.
"Where has she gone, sir?" I said, trying to conceal my impatience. "I
thought that Martin told me she was here; indeed, that he had seen her
after I arrived."

"I am not sure, do you know," Sir Anthony answered, eying me absently,
"that I was wise, but I considered she was safer away, Francis. And
she can be fetched back in the morning. I feared there might be some
disturbance in the house--as indeed there well might have been--and
though she begged very hard to stay with me, I sent her off."

"This evening, sir?" I stammered, suddenly chilled.

"Yes, an hour ago."

"But an hour ago every approach was guarded, Sir Anthony," I cried in
surprise. "I had the greatest difficulty in slipping through from the
outside myself, well as I know every field and tree. To escape from
within, even for a man, much less a woman, would have been impossible.
She will have been stopped."

"I think not," he said, with a smile at once sage and indulgent--which
seemed to add, "You think yourself a clever lad, but you do not know
everything yet."

"I sent her out by the secret passage to the mill-house, you see," he
explained, "as soon as I heard the sheriff's party outside. I could
have given them the slip myself, had I pleased."

"The mill house?" I answered. The mill stood nearly a quarter of a
mile from Coton End, beyond the gardens, and in the direction of the
village. I remembered vaguely that I had heard from the servants in
old days some talk of a secret outlet leading from the house to it.
But they knew no particulars, and its existence was only darkly
rumored among them.

"You did not know of the passage," Sir Anthony said, chuckling at my
astonishment. "No, I remember. But the girl did. Your father and his
wife went with her. He quite agreed in the wisdom of sending her away,
and indeed advised it. On reaching the mill, if they found all quiet
they were to walk across to Watney's farm. There they could get horses
and might ride at their leisure to Stratford and wait the event. I
thought it best for her; and Ferdinand agreed."

"And my father--went with her?" I muttered hoarsely, feeling myself
growing chill to the heart. Hardly could I restrain my indignation at
Sir Anthony's folly, or my own anger and disappointment--and fear. For
though my head seemed on fire and there was a tumult in my brain, I
was cool enough to trace clearly my father's motives, and discern with
what a deliberate purpose he had acted. "He went with her?"

"Yes, he and his wife," the knight answered, noticing nothing in his
obtuseness.

"You have been fooled, sir," I said bitterly. "My father you should
have known, and for his wife, she is a bad, unscrupulous woman! Oh,
the madness of it, to put my cousin into their hands!"

"What do you mean?" the knight cried, beginning to tremble. "Your
father is a changed man, lad. He has come back to the old faith and in
a dark hour too. He----"

"He is a hypocrite and a villain!" I retorted, stung almost to madness
by this wound in my tenderest place; stung indeed beyond endurance.
Why should I spare him, when to spare him was to sacrifice the
innocent? Why should I pick my words, when my love was in danger? He
had had no mercy and no pity. Why should I shrink from exposing him?
Heaven had dealt with him patiently and given him life; and he did but
abuse it. I could keep silence no longer, and told Sir Anthony all
with a stinging tongue and in gibing words; even, at last, how my
father had given me a hint of the very plan he had now carried out, of
coming down to Coton, and goading his brother into some offense which
might leave his estate at the mercy of the authorities.

"I did not think he meant it," I said bitterly. "But I might have
known that the leopard does not change its spots. How you, who knew
him years ago, and knew that he had plotted against you since, came to
trust him again--to trust your daughter to him--passes my fancy!"

"He was my brother," the knight murmured, leaning white and stricken
on my shoulder.

"And my father--heaven help us!" I rejoined.




                             CHAPTER XXV.

                          IN HARBOR AT LAST.


"We must first help ourselves," Sir Anthony answered sharply; rousing
himself with wonderful energy from the prostration into which my story
had thrown him. "I will send after her. She shall be brought back. Ho!
Baldwin! Martin!" he cried loudly. "Send Baldwin hither! Be quick
there!"

Out of the ruck of servants in and about the hall, Baldwin came
rushing presently, wiping his lips as he approached. A single glance
at our faces sobered him. "Send Martin down to the mill!" Sir Anthony
ordered curtly. "Bid him tell my daughter if she be there to come
back. And do you saddle a couple of horses, and be ready to ride with
Master Francis to Watney's farm, and on to Stratford, if it be
necessary. Lose not a minute; my daughter is with Master Ferdinand. My
order is that she return."

The fool had come up only a pace or two behind the steward. "Do you
hear, Martin?" I added eagerly, turning to him. My thoughts, busy with
the misery which might befall her in their hands, maddened me. "You
will bring her back if you find her, mind you."

He did not answer, but his eyes glittered as they met mine, and I knew
that he understood. As he flitted silently across the court and
disappeared under the gateway, I knew that no hound could be more
sure, I knew that he would not leave the trail until he had found
Petronilla, though he had to follow her for many a mile. We might have
to pursue the fugitives to Stratford, but I felt sure that Martin's
lean figure and keen dark face would be there to meet us.

Us? No. Sir Anthony indeed said to me, "You will go of course?"
speaking as if only one answer were possible.

But it was not to be so. "No," I said, "you had better go, sir. Or
Baldwin can be trusted. He can take two or three of the grooms. They
should be armed," I added, in a lower tone.

My uncle looked hard at me, and then gave his assent, no longer
wondering why I did not go. Instead he bade Baldwin do as I had
suggested. In truth my heart was so hot with wrath and indignation
that I dared not follow, lest my father, in his stern, mocking way,
should refuse to let her go, and harm should happen between us. If I
were right in my suspicions, and he had capped his intrigue by
deliberately getting the girl I loved into his hands as a hostage,
either as a surety that I would share with him if I succeeded to the
estates, or as a means of extorting money from his brother, then I
dared not trust myself face to face with him. If I could have mounted
and ridden after my love, I could have borne it better. But the curse
seemed to cling to me still. My worst foe was one against whom I could
not lift my hand.

"But what," my uncle asked, his voice quavering, though his words
seemed intended to combat my fears, "what can he do, lad? She is his
niece."

"What?" I answered, with a shudder. "I do not know, but I fear
everything. If he should elude us and take her abroad with him--heaven
help her, sir! He will use her somehow to gain his ends--or kill her."

Sir Anthony wiped his brow with a trembling hand. "Baldwin will
overtake them," he said.

"Let us hope so," I answered. Alas, how far fell fruition short of
anticipation. This was my time of triumph! "You had better go in,
sir," I said presently, gaining a little mastery over myself. "I see
Sir Philip has returned; from settling his men for the night. He and
Greville will be wondering what has happened."

"And you?" he said.

"I cannot," I answered, shaking my head.


After he had gone I stood a while in the shadow on the far side of the
court, listening to the clatter of knives and dishes, the cheerful hum
of the servants as they called to one another, the hurrying footsteps
of the maids. A dog crept out, and licked my hand as it hung nerveless
by my side. Surely Martin or Baldwin would overtake them. Or if not,
it still was not so easy to take a girl abroad against her will.

But would that be his plan? He must have hiding-places in England to
which he might take her, telling her any wild story of her father's
death or flight, or even perhaps of her own danger if her whereabouts
were known. I had had experience of his daring, his cunning, his
plausibility. Had he not taken in all with whom he had come into
contact, except, by some strange fate, myself. To be sure Anne was not
altogether without feeling or conscience. But she was his--his
entirely, body and soul. Yes, if I could have followed, I could have
borne it better. It was this dreadful inaction which was killing me.

The bustle and voices of the servants, who were in high spirits, so
irritated me at last that I wandered away, going first to the dark,
silent gardens, where I walked up and down in a fever of doubt and
fear, much as I had done on the last evening I had spent at Coton.
Then a fancy seized me, and turning from the fish-pond I walked toward
the house. Crossing the moat I made for the church door and tried it.
It was unlocked. I went in. Here at least in the sacred place I should
find quietness; and unable to help myself in this terrible crisis,
might get help from One to whom my extremity was but an opportunity.

I walked up the aisle and, finding all in darkness, the moon at the
moment being obscured, felt my way as far as Sir Piers' flat monument,
and sat down upon it. I had been there scarcely a minute when a faint
sound, which seemed rather a sigh or an audible shudder than any
articulate word, came out of the darkness in front of me. My great
trouble had seemed to make superstitious fears for the time
impossible, but at this sound I started and trembled; and holding my
breath felt a cold shiver run down my back. Motionless I peered before
me, and yet could see nothing. All was gloom, the only distinguishable
feature being the east window.

What was that? A soft rustle as of ghostly garments moving in the
aisle was succeeded by another sigh which made me rise from my seat,
my hair stiffening. Then I saw the outline of the east window growing
brighter and brighter, and I knew that the moon was about to shine
clear of the clouds, and longed to turn and fly, yet did not dare to
move.

Suddenly the light fell on the altar steps and disclosed a kneeling
form which seemed to be partly turned toward me as though watching me.
The face I could not see--it was in shadow--and I stood transfixed,
gazing at the figure, half in superstitious terror and half in wonder;
until a voice I had not heard for years, and yet should have known
among a thousand, said softly, "Francis!"

"Who calls me?" I muttered hoarsely, knowing and yet disbelieving,
hoping and yet with a terrible fear at heart.

"It is I, Petronilla!" said the same voice gently. And then the form
rose and glided toward me through the moonlight. "It is I, Petronilla.
Do you not know me?" said my love again; and fell upon my breast.

                          *   *   *   *   *

She had been firmly resolved all the time not to quit her father, and
on the first opportunity had given the slip to her company, while the
horses were being saddled at Watney's farm. Stealing back through the
darkness she had found the house full of uproar, and apparently
occupied by strange troopers. Aghast and not knowing what to do, she
had bethought herself of the church and there taken refuge. On my
first entrance she was horribly alarmed. But as I walked up the
aisle, she recognized--so she has since told me a thousand times with
pride--my footstep, though it had long been a stranger to her ear, and
she had no thought at the moment of seeing me, or hearing the joyful
news I brought.


And so my story is told. For what passed then between Petronilla and
me lies between my wife and myself. And it is an old, old story, and
one which our children have no need to learn, for they have told it,
many of them for themselves, and their children are growing up to tell
it. I think in some odd corner of the house there may still be found a
very ancient swallow's nest, which young girls bring out and look at
tenderly; but for my sword-knot I fear it has been worn out these
thirty years. What matter, even though it was velvet of Genoa? He that
has the substance, lacks not the shadow.

I never saw my father again, nor learned accurately what passed at
Watney's farm after Petronilla was missed by her two companions. But
one man, whom I could ill spare, was also missing on that night, whose
fate is still something of a mystery. That was Martin Luther. I have
always believed that he fell in a desperate encounter with my father,
but no traces of the struggle, or his body were ever found. The track
between Watney's farm and Stratford, however, runs for a certain
distance by the river; and at some point on this road I think Martin
must have come up with the refugees, and failing either to find
Petronilla with them, or to get any satisfactory account of her, must
have flung himself on my father and been foiled and killed. The exact
truth I have said was never known, though Baldwin and I talked over it
again and again; and there were even some who said that a servant much
resembling Martin Luther was seen with my father in the Low Countries
not a month before his death. I put no credence in this, however,
having good reason to think that the poor fool--who was wiser in his
sane moments than most men--would never have left my service while the
breath remained in his body.

I have heard it said that blood washes out shame. My father was killed
in a skirmish in the Netherlands shortly before the peace of Chateau
Cambrsis, and about three months after the events here related. I
have no doubt that he died as a brave man should; for he had that
virtue. He held no communication with me or with any at Coton End
later than that which I have here described; but would appear to have
entered the service of Cardinal Granvelle, the governor of the
Netherlands, for after his death word came to the Duchess of Suffolk
that Mistress Anne Cludde had entered a nunnery at Bruges under the
Cardinal's auspices. Doubtless she is long since dead.

And so are many others of whom I have spoken--Sir Anthony, the
Duchess, Master Bertie, and Master Lindstrom. For forty years have
passed since these things happened--years of peaceful, happy life,
which have gone by more swiftly, as it seems to me in the retrospect,
than the four years of my wanderings. The Lindstroms sought refuge in
England in the second year of the Queen, and settled in Lowestoft
under the Duchess of Suffolk's protection, and did well and flourished
as became them; nor indeed did they find, I trust, others ungrateful,
though I experienced some difficulty in inducing Sir Anthony to treat
the Dutch burgher as on an equality with himself. Lord Willoughby de
Eresby, the Peregrine to whom I stood godfather in St. Willibrod's
church at Wesel, is now a middle-aged man and my very good friend, the
affection which his mother felt for me having descended to him in full
measure. She was indeed such a woman as Her Majesty; large-hearted and
free-tongued, of masculine courage and a wonderful tenderness. And of
her husband what can I say save that he was a brave Christian--and in
peaceful times--a studious gentleman.

But it is not only in vacant seats and gray hairs that I trace the
progress of forty years. They have done for England almost all that
men hoped they might do in the first dawn of the reign. We have seen
great foes defeated, and strong friends gained. We have seen the
coinage amended, trade doubled, the Exchequer filled, the roads made
good, the poor provided for in a Christian manner, the Church grown
strong; all this in these years. We have seen Holland rise and Spain
decline, and well may say in the words of the old text, which my
grandfather set up over the hall door at Coton, "_Frustra, nisi
Dominus_."




                               THE END.







End of Project Gutenberg's The Story of Francis Cludde, by Stanley J. Weyman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF FRANCIS CLUDDE ***

***** This file should be named 39296-8.txt or 39296-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/2/9/39296/

Produced by Charles Bowen, from page scans provided by the
Web Archive (University of California Libraries)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Red Cockade, by Stanley J. Weyman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Red Cockade

Author: Stanley J. Weyman

Release Date: March 29, 2012 [EBook #39297]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RED COCKADE ***




Produced by Charles Bowen, from page scans provided by the
Web Archive (University of Toronto)











Transcriber's Notes:

   1. Page scan source:
      http://www.archive.org/details/redcockade00weymuoft
      (University of Toronto)






                           THE RED COCKADE






                      _WORKS BY STANLEY WEYMAN_.

       The House of the Wolf.
       A Gentleman of France.
       Under the Red Robe.
       My Lady Rotha.
       The New Rector.
       The Story of Francis Cludde.
       The Man in Black.
       From the Memoirs of a Minister of France.
       The Red Cockade.




                      ABERDEEN UNIVERSITY PRESS







[Illustration: "'MESSIEURS,' HE CRIED." _See page_ 21.]






                           THE RED COCKADE




                                  BY
                            STANLEY WEYMAN
               AUTHOR OF "A GENTLEMAN OF FRANCE," ETC.





                                LONDON
                       LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.
                                 1895




                              CONTENTS.


   CHAPTER

         I. The Marquis de St. Alais.

        II. The Ordeal.

       III. In the Assembly.

        IV. L'ami du Peuple.

         V. The Deputation.

        VI. A Meeting in the Road.

       VII. The Alarm.

      VIII. Gargouf.

        IX. The Tricolour.

         X. The Morning after the Storm.

        XI. The Two Camps.

       XII. The Duel.

      XIII. A la Lanterne.

       XIV. It Goes Ill.

        XV. At Milhau.

       XVI. Three in a Carriage.

      XVII. Froment of Nmes.

     XVIII. A Poor Figure.

       XIX. At Nmes

        XX. The Search.

       XXI. Rivals.

      XXII. Noblesse Oblige.

     XXIII. The Crisis.

      XXIV. The Millennium.

       XXV. Beyond the Shadow.





                           THE RED COCKADE.



                              CHAPTER I.

                      THE MARQUIS DE ST. ALAIS.


When we reached the terraced walk, which my father made a little
before his death, and which, running under the windows at the rear of
the Chteau, separates the house from the new lawn, St. Alais looked
round with eyes of scarcely-veiled contempt.

"What have you done with the garden?" he asked, his lip curling.

"My father removed it to the other side of the house," I answered.

"Out of sight?"

"Yes," I said; "it is beyond the rose garden."

"English fashion!" he answered with a shrug and a polite sneer. "And
you prefer to see all this grass from your windows?"

"Yes," I said, "I do."

"Ah! And that plantation? It hides the village, I suppose, from the
house?"

"Yes."

He laughed. "Yes," he said. "I notice that that is the way of all who
prate of the people, and freedom, and fraternity. They love the
people; but they love them at a distance, on the farther side of a
park or a high yew hedge. Now, at St. Alais I like to have my folks
under my eye, and then, if they do not behave, there is the _carcan_.
By the way, what have you done with yours, Vicomte? It used to stand
opposite the entrance."

"I have burned it," I said, feeling the blood mount to my temples.

"Your father did, you mean?" he answered, with a glance of surprise.

"No," I said stubbornly, hating myself for being ashamed of that
before St. Alais of which I had been proud enough when alone. "I did.
I burned it last winter. I think the day of such things is past."

The Marquis was not my senior by more than five years; but those five
years, spent in Paris and Versailles, gave him a wondrous advantage,
and I felt his look of contemptuous surprise as I should have felt a
blow. However, he did not say anything at the moment, but after a
short pause changed the subject and began to speak of my father;
recalling him and things in connection with him in a tone of respect
and affection that in a moment disarmed my resentment.

"The first time that I shot a bird on the wing I was in his company!"
he said, with the wonderful charm of manner that had been St. Alais'
even in boyhood.

"Twelve years ago," I said.

"Even so, Monsieur," he replied with a laughing bow. "In those days
there was a small boy with bare legs, who ran after me, and called me
Victor, and thought me the greatest of men. I little dreamed that he
would ever live to expound the rights of man to me. And, _Dieu!_
Vicomte, I must keep Louis from you, or you will make him as great a
reformer as yourself. However," he continued, passing from that
subject with a smile and an easy gesture, "I did not come here to talk
of him, but of one, M. le Vicomte, in whom you should feel even
greater interest."

I felt the blood mount to my temples again, but for a different
reason. "Mademoiselle has come home?" I said.

"Yesterday," he answered. "She will go with my mother to Cahors
to-morrow, and take her first peep at the world. I do not doubt that
among the many new things she will see, none will interest her more
than the Vicomte de Saux."

"Mademoiselle is well?" I said clumsily.

"Perfectly," he answered with grave politeness, "as you will see for
yourself to-morrow evening, if we do not meet on the road. I daresay
that you will like a week or so to commend yourself to her, M. le
Vicomte? And after that, whenever Madame la Marquise and you can
settle the date, and so forth, the match had better come off--while I
am here."

I bowed. I had been expecting to hear this for a week past; but from
Louis, who was on brotherly terms with me, not from Victor. The latter
had indeed been my boyish idol; but that was years ago, before Court
life and a long stay at Versailles and St. Cloud had changed him into
the splendid-looking man I saw before me, the raillery of whose eye I
found it as difficult to meet as I found it impossible to match the
aplomb of his manner. Still, I strove to make such acknowledgments as
became me; and to adopt that nice mixture of self-respect, politeness,
and devotion which I knew that the occasion, formally treated,
required. But my tongue stumbled, and in a moment he relieved me.

"Well, you must tell that to Denise," he said pleasantly; "doubtless
you will find her a patient listener. At first, of course," he
continued, pulling on his gauntlets and smiling faintly, "she will be
a little shy. I have no doubt that the good sisters have brought her
up to regard a man in much the same light as a wolf; and a suitor as
something worse. But, _eh bien, mon ami!_ women are women after all,
and in a week or two you will commend yourself. We may hope, then, to
see you to-morrow evening--if not before?"

"Most certainly, M. le Marquis."

"Why not Victor?" he answered, laying his hand on my arm with a touch
of the old _bonhomie_. "We shall soon be brothers, and then,
doubtless, shall hate one another. In the meantime, give me your
company to the gates. There was one other thing I wanted to name to
you. Let me see--what was it?"

But either he could not immediately remember, or he found a difficulty
in introducing the subject, for we were nearly half-way down the
avenue of walnut trees that leads to the village when he spoke again.
Then he plunged into the matter abruptly.

"You have heard of this protest?" he said.

"Yes," I answered reluctantly and with a foresight of trouble.

"You will sign it, of course?"

He had hesitated before he asked the question; I hesitated before I
answered it. The protest to which he referred--how formal the phrase
now sounds, though we know that under it lay the beginning of trouble
and a new world--was one which it was proposed to move in the coming
meeting of the _noblesse_ at Cahors; its aim, to condemn the conduct
of our representatives at Versailles, in consenting to sit with the
Third Estate.

Now, for myself, whatever had been my original views on this
question--and, as a fact, I should have preferred to see reform
following the English model, the nobles' house remaining separate--I
regarded the step, now it was taken, and legalised by the King, as
irrevocable; and protest as useless. More, I could not help knowing
that those who were moving the protest desired also to refuse all
reform, to cling to all privileges, to balk all hopes of better
government; hopes, which had been rising higher, day by day, since the
elections, and which it might not now be so safe or so easy to balk.
Without swallowing convictions, therefore, which were pretty well
known, I could not see my way to supporting it. And I hesitated.

"Well?" he said at last, finding me still silent.

"I do not think that I can," I answered, flushing.

"Can support it?"

"No," I said.

He laughed genially. "Pooh!" he said. "I think that you will. I want
your promise, Vicomte. It is a small matter; a trifle, and of no
importance; but we must be unanimous. That is the one thing
necessary."

I shook my head. We had both come to a halt under the trees, a little
within the gates. His servant was leading the horses up and down the
road.

"Come," he persisted pleasantly: "you do not think that anything is
going to come of this chaotic States General, which his Majesty was
mad enough to let Neckar summon? They met on the 4th of May; this is
the 17th of July; and to this date they have done nothing but wrangle!
Nothing! Presently they will be dismissed, and there will be an end of
it!"

"Why protest, then?" I said rather feebly.

"I will tell you, my friend," he answered, smiling indulgently and
tapping his boot with his whip. "Have you heard the latest news?"

"What is it?" I replied cautiously. "Then I will tell you if I have
heard it."

"The King has dismissed Neckar!"

"No!" I cried, unable to hide my surprise.

"Yes," he answered; "the banker is dismissed. In a week his States
General or National Assembly, or whatever he pleases to call it, will
go too, and we shall be where we were before. Only, in the meantime,
and to strengthen the King in the wise course he is at last pursuing,
we must show that we are alive. We must show our sympathy with him. We
must act. We must protest."

"But, M. le Marquis," I said, a little heated, perhaps, by the news,
"are you sure that the people will quietly endure this? Never was so
bitter a winter as last winter; never a worse harvest, or such
pinching. On the top of these, their hopes have been raised, and their
minds excited by the elections, and----

"Whom have we to thank for that?" he said, with a whimsical glance at
me. "But, never fear, Vicomte; they will endure it. I know Paris; and
I can assure you that it is not the Paris of the Fronde, though M. de
Mirabeau would play the Retz. It is a peaceable, sensible Paris, and
it will not rise. Except a bread riot or two, it has seen no rising to
speak of for a century and a half: nothing that two companies of Swiss
could not deal with as easily as D'Argenson cleared the Cour des
Miracles. Believe me, there is no danger of that kind: with the least
management, all will go well!"

But his news had roused my antagonism. I found it more easy to resist
him now.

"I do not know," I said coldly; "I do not think that the matter is so
simple as you say. The King must have money, or be bankrupt; the
people have no money to pay him. I do not see how things can go back
to the old state."

M. de St. Alais looked at me with a gleam of anger in his eyes.

"You mean, Vicomte," he said, "that you do not wish them to go back?"

"I mean that the old state was impossible," I said stiffly. "It could
not last. It cannot return."

For a moment he did not answer, and we stood confronting one
another--he just without, I just within, the gateway--the cool foliage
stretching over us, the dust and July sunshine in the road beyond him;
and if my face reflected his, it was flushed, and set, and determined.
But in a twinkling his changed; he broke into an easy, polite laugh,
and shrugged his shoulders with a touch of contempt.

"Well," he said, "we will not argue; but I hope that you will sign.
Think it over, M. le Vicomte, think it over. Because"--he paused, and
looked at me gaily--"we do not know what may be depending upon it."

"That is a reason," I answered quickly, "for thinking more before
I----

"It is a reason for thinking more before you refuse," he said, bowing
very low, and this time without smiling. Then he turned to his horse,
and his servant held the stirrup while he mounted. When he was in the
saddle and had gathered up the reins, he bent his face to mine.

"Of course," he said, speaking in a low voice, and with a searching
look at me, "a contract is a contract, M. le Vicomte; and the
Montagues and Capulets, like your _carcan_, are out of date. But, all
the same, we must go one way--_comprenez-vous?_--we must go one
way--or separate! At least, I think so."

And nodding pleasantly, as if he had uttered in these words a
compliment instead of a threat, he rode off; leaving me to stand and
fret and fume, and finally to stride back under the trees with my
thoughts in a whirl, and all my plans and hopes jarring one another in
a petty copy of the confusion that that day prevailed, though I
guessed it but dimly, from one end of France to the other.

For I could not be blind to his meaning; nor ignorant that he had, no
matter how politely, bidden me choose between the alliance with his
family, which my father had arranged for me, and the political views
in which my father had brought me up, and which a year's residence in
England had not failed to strengthen. Alone in the Chteau since my
father's death, I had lived a good deal in the future--in day-dreams
of Denise de St. Alais, the fair girl who was to be my wife, and whom
I had not seen since she went to her convent school; in day-dreams,
also, of work to be done in spreading round me the prosperity I had
seen in England. Now, St. Alais' words menaced one or other of these
prospects; and that was bad enough. But, in truth, it was not that, so
much as his presumption, that stung me; that made me swear one moment
and laugh the next, in a kind of irritation not difficult to
understand. I was twenty-two, he was twenty-seven; and he dictated to
me! We were country bumpkins, he of the _haute politique_, and he had
come from Versailles or from Paris to drill us! If I went his way I
might marry his sister; if not, I might not! That was the position.

No wonder that before he had left me half an hour I had made up my
mind to resist him; and so spent the rest of the day composing sound
and unanswerable reasons for the course I intended to take; now
conning over a letter in which M. de Liancourt set forth his plan of
reform, now summarising the opinions with which M. de Rochefoucauld
had favoured me on his last journey to Luchon. In half an hour and the
heat of temper! thinking no more than ten thousand others, who that
week chose one of two courses, what I was doing. Gargouf, the St.
Alais' steward, who doubtless heard that day the news of Neckar's
fall, and rejoiced, had no foresight of what it meant to him. Father
Benit, the cure, who supped with me that evening, and heard the
tidings with sorrow--he, too, had no special vision. And the
innkeeper's son at La Bastide, by Cahors--probably he, also, heard the
news; but no shadow of a sceptre fell across his path, nor any of a
_bton_ on that of the notary at the other La Bastide. A notary, a
_bton_! An innkeeper, a sceptre! _Mon Dieu!_ what conjunctions they
would have seemed in those days! We should have been wiser than
Daniel, and more prudent than Joseph, if we had foreseen such things
under the old _rgime_--in the old France, in the old world, that died
in that month of July, 1789!

And yet there were signs, even then, to be read by those with eyes,
that foretold something, if but a tithe of the inconceivable future;
of which signs I myself remarked sufficient by the way next day to
fill my mind with other thoughts than private resentment; with some
nobler aims than self-assertion. Riding to Cahors, with Gil and Andr
at my back, I saw not only the havoc caused by the great frosts of the
winter and spring, not only walnut trees blackened and withered, vines
stricken, rye killed, a huge proportion of the land fallow, desert,
gloomy and unsown: not only those common signs of poverty to which use
had accustomed me--though on my first return from England I had viewed
them with horror--mud cabins, I mean, and unglazed windows, starved
cattle, and women bent double, gathering weeds. But I saw other things
more ominous; a strange herding of men at cross-roads and bridges,
where they waited for they knew not what; a something lowering in
these men's silence, a something expectant in their faces; worst of
all, a something dangerous in their scowling eyes and sunken cheeks.
Hunger had pinched them; the elections had roused them. I trembled to
think of the issue, and that in the hint of danger I had given St.
Alais, I had been only too near the mark.

A league farther on, where the woodlands skirt Cahors, I lost sight of
these things; but for a time only. They reappeared presently in
another form. The first view of the town, as, girt by the shining Lot,
and protected by ramparts and towers, it nestles under the steep
hills, is apt to take the eye; its matchless bridge, and time-worn
Cathedral, and great palace seldom failing to rouse the admiration
even of those who know them. But that day I saw none of these things.
As I passed down towards the market-place they were selling grain
under a guard of soldiers with fixed bayonets; and the starved faces
of the waiting crowd that filled all that side of the square, their
shrunken, half-naked figures, and dark looks, and the sullen
muttering, which seemed so much at odds with the sunshine, occupied
me, to the exclusion of everything else.

Or not quite. I had eyes for one other thing, and that was the
astonishing indifference with which those whom curiosity, or business,
or habit had brought to the spot, viewed this spectacle. The inns were
full of the gentry of the province, come to the Assembly; they looked
on from the windows, as at a show, and talked and jested as if at home
in their chteaux. Before the doors of the Cathedral a group of ladies
and clergymen walked to and fro, and now and then they turned a
listless eye on what was passing; but for the most part they seemed to
be unconscious of it, or, at the best, to have no concern with it. I
have heard it said since, that in those days we had two worlds in
France, as far apart as hell and heaven; and what I saw that evening
went far to prove it.

In the square a shop at which pamphlets and journals were sold was
full of customers, though other shops in the neighbourhood were
closed, their owners fearing mischief. On the skirts of the crowd, and
a little aloof from it, I saw Gargouf, the St. Alais' steward. He was
talking to a countryman; and, as I passed, I heard him say with a
gibe, "Well, has your National Assembly fed you yet?"

"Not yet," the clown answered stupidly, "but I am told that in a few
days they will satisfy everybody."

"Not they!" the agent answered brutally. "Why, do you think that they
will feed you?"

"Oh, yes, by your leave; it is certain," the man said. "And, besides,
every one is agreed----"

But then Gargouf saw me, saluted me, and I heard no more. A moment
later, however, I came on one of my own people, Buton, the blacksmith,
in the middle of a muttering group. He looked at me sheepishly,
finding himself caught; and I stopped, and rated him soundly, and saw
him start for home before I went to my quarters.

These were at the Trois Rois, where I always lay when in town; Doury,
the innkeeper, providing a supper ordinary for the gentry at eight
o'clock, at which it was the custom to dress and powder.

The St. Alais had their own house in Cahors, and, as the Marquis had
forewarned me, entertained that evening. The greater part of the
company, indeed, repaired to them after the meal. I went myself a
little late, that I might avoid any private talk with the Marquis; I
found the rooms already full and brilliantly lighted, the staircase
crowded with valets, and the strains of a harpsichord trickling
melodiously from the windows. Madame de St. Alais was in the habit of
entertaining the best company in the province; with less splendour,
perhaps, than some, but with so much ease, and taste, and good
breeding, that I look in vain for such a house in these days.

Ordinarily, she preferred to people her rooms with pleasant groups,
that, gracefully disposed, gave to a _salon_ an air elegant and
pleasing, and in character with the costume of those days, the silks
and laces, powder and diamonds, the full hoops and red-heeled shoes.
But on this occasion the crowd and the splendour of the entertainment
apprised me, as soon as I crossed the threshold, that I was assisting
at a party of more than ordinary importance; nor had I advanced far
before I guessed that it was a political rather than a social
gathering. All, or almost all, who would attend the Assembly next day
were here; and though, as I wound my way through the glittering crowd,
I heard very little serious talk--so little, that I marvelled to think
that people could discuss the respective merits of French and Italian
opera, of Grtry and Bianchi, and the like, while so much hung in the
balance--of the effect intended I had no doubt; nor that Madame, in
assembling all the wit and beauty of the province, was aiming at
things higher than amusement.

With, I am bound to confess, a degree of success. At any rate it was
difficult to mix with the throng which filled her rooms, to run the
gauntlet of bright eyes and witty tongues, to breathe the atmosphere
laden with perfume and music, without falling under the spell, without
forgetting. Inside the door M. de Gontaut, one of my father's oldest
friends, was talking with the two Harincourts. He greeted me with a
sly smile, and pointed politely inwards.

"Pass on, Monsieur," he said. "The farthest room. Ah! my friend, I
wish I were young again!"

"Your gain would be my loss, M. le Baron," I said civilly, and slid by
him. Next, I had to speak to two or three ladies, who detained me with
wicked congratulations of the same kind; and then I came on Louis. He
clasped my hand, and we stood a moment together. The crowd elbowed us;
a simpering fool at his shoulder was prating of the social contract.
But as I felt the pressure of Louis' hand, and looked into his eyes,
it seemed to me that a breath of air from the woods penetrated the
room, and swept aside the heavy perfumes.

Yet there was trouble in his look. He asked me if I had seen Victor.

"Yesterday," I said, understanding him perfectly, and what was amiss.
"Not to-day."

"Nor Denise?"

"No. I have not had the honour of seeing Mademoiselle."

"Then, come," he answered. "My mother expected you earlier. What did
you think of Victor?"

"That he went Victor, and has returned a great personage!" I said,
smiling.

Louis laughed faintly, and lifted his eyebrows with a comical air of
sufferance.

"I was afraid so," he said. "He did not seem to be very well pleased
with you. But we must all do his bidding--eh, Monsieur? And, in the
meantime, come. My mother and Denise are in the farthest room."

He led the way thither as he spoke; but we had first to go through the
card-room, and then the crowd about the farther doorway was so dense
that we could not immediately enter; and so I had time--while
outwardly smiling and bowing--to feel a little suspense. At last we
slipped through and entered a smaller room, where were only Madame la
Marquise--who was standing in the middle of the floor talking with the
Abb Mesnil--two or three ladies, and Denise de St. Alais.

Mademoiselle had her seat on a couch by one of the ladies; and
naturally my eyes went first to her. She was dressed in white, and it
struck me with the force of a blow how small, how childish she was!
Very fair, of the purest complexion, and perfectly formed, she seemed
to derive an extravagant, an absurd, air of dignity from the formality
of her dress, from the height of the powdered hair that strained
upwards from her forehead, from the stiffness of her brocaded
petticoat. But she was very small. I had time to note this, to feel a
little disappointment, and to fancy that, cast in a larger mould, she
would have been supremely handsome; and then the lady beside her,
seeing me, spoke to her, and the child--she was really little
more--looked up, her face grown crimson. Our eyes met--thank God! she
had Louis' eyes--and she looked down again, blushing painfully.

I advanced to pay my respects to Madame, and kissed the hand, which,
without at once breaking off her conversation, she extended to me.

"But such powers!" the Abb, who had something of the reputation of a
_philosophe_, was saying to her. "Without limit! Without check!
Misused, Madame----"

"But the King is too good!" Madame la Marquise answered, smiling.

"When well advised, I agree. But then the deficit?"

The Marquise shrugged her shoulders. "His Majesty must have money,"
she said.

"Yes--but whence?" the Abb asked, with answering shrug.

"The King was too good at the beginning," Madame replied, with a
touch of severity. "He should have made them register the edicts.
However, the Parliament has always given way, and will do so again."

"The Parliament--yes," the Abb retorted, smiling indulgently. "But it
is no longer a question of the Parliament; and the States General----"

"States General pass," Madame responded grandly. "The King remains!"

"Yet if trouble comes?"

"It will not," Madame answered with the same grand air. "His Majesty
will prevent it." And then with a word or two more she dismissed the
Abb and turned to me. She tapped me on the shoulder with her fan.
"Ah! truant," she said, with a glance in which kindness and a little
austerity were mingled. "I do not know what I am to say to you!
Indeed, from the account Victor gave me yesterday, I hardly knew
whether to expect you this evening or not. Are you sure that it is you
who are here?"

"I will answer for my heart, Madame," I answered, laying my hand upon
it.

Her eyes twinkled kindly.

"Then," she said, "bring it where it is due, Monsieur." And she turned
with a fine air of ceremony, and led me to her daughter. "Denise," she
said, "this is M. le Vicomte de Saux, the son of my old, my good
friend. M. le Vicomte--my daughter. Perhaps you will amuse her while I
go back to the Abb."

Probably Mademoiselle had spent the evening in an agony of shyness,
expecting this moment; for she curtesied to the floor, and then stood
dumb and confused, forgetting even to sit down, until I covered her
with fresh blushes by begging her to do so. When she had complied, I
took my stand before her, with my hat in my hand; but between seeking
for the right compliment, and trying to trace a likeness between her
and the wild, brown-faced child of thirteen, whom I had known four
years before--and from the dignified height of nineteen immeasurably
despised--I grew shy myself.

"You came home last week, Mademoiselle?" I said at last.

"Yes, Monsieur," she answered, in a whisper, and with downcast eyes.

"It must be a great change for you!"

"Yes, Monsieur."

Silence: then, "Doubtless the Sisters were good to you?" I suggested.

"Yes, Monsieur."

"Yet, you were not sorry to leave?"

"Yes, Monsieur."

But on that the meaning of what she had last said came home to her, or
she felt the banality of her answers; for, on a sudden, she looked
swiftly up at me, her face scarlet, and, if I was not mistaken, she
was within a little of bursting into tears. The thought appalled me. I
stooped lower.

"Mademoiselle!" I said hurriedly, "pray do not be afraid of me.
Whatever happens, you shall never have need to fear me. I beg of you
to look on me as a friend--as your brother's friend. Louis is my----"

Crash! While the name hung on my lips, something struck me on the
back, and I staggered forward, almost into her arms; amid a shiver of
broken glass, a flickering of lights, a rising chorus of screams and
cries. For a moment I could not think what was happening, or had
happened; the blow had taken away my breath. I was conscious only of
Mademoiselle clinging terrified to my arm, of her face, wild with
fright, looking up to me, of the sudden cessation of the music. Then,
as people pressed in on us, and I began to recover, I turned and saw
that the window behind me had been driven in, and the lead and panes
shattered; and that among the _dbris_ on the floor lay a great stone.
It was that which had struck me.




                             CHAPTER II.

                             THE ORDEAL.


It was wonderful how quickly the room filled--filled with angry faces,
so that almost before I knew what had happened, I found a crowd round
me, asking what it was; M. de St. Alais foremost. As all spoke at
once, and in the background where they could not see, ladies were
screaming and chattering, I might have found it difficult to explain.
But the shattered window and the great stone on the floor spoke for
themselves, and told more quickly than I could what had taken place.

On the instant, with a speed which surprised me, the sight blew into a
flame passions already smouldering. A dozen voices cried, "Out on the
_canaille!_" In a moment some one in the background followed this up
with "Swords, Messieurs, swords!" Then, in a trice half the gentlemen
were elbowing one another towards the door, St. Alais, who burned to
avenge the insult offered to his guests, taking the lead. M. de
Gontaut and one or two of the elders tried to restrain him, but their
remonstrances were in vain, and in a moment the room was almost
emptied of men. They poured out into the street, and began to scour it
with drawn blades and raised voices. A dozen valets, running out
officiously with flambeaux, aided in the search; for a few minutes the
street, as we who remained viewed it from the windows, seemed to be
alive with moving lights and figures.

But the rascals who had flung the stone, whatever the motive which
inspired them, had fled in time; and presently our party returned,
some a little ashamed of their violence, others laughing as they
entered, and bewailing their silk stockings and spattered shoes; while
a few, less fashionable or more impetuous, continued to denounce the
insult, and threaten vengeance. At another time, the act might have
seemed trivial, a childish insult; but in the strained state of public
feeling it had an unpleasant and menacing air which was not lost on
the more thoughtful. During the absence of the street party, the
draught from the broken window had blown a curtain against some
candles and set it alight; and though the stuff had been torn down
with little damage, it still smoked among the _dbris_ on the floor.
This, with the startled faces of the ladies, and the shattered glass,
gave a look of disorder and ruin to the room, where a few minutes
before all had worn so seemly and festive an air.

It did not surprise me, therefore, that St. Alais' face, stern enough
at his entrance, grew darker as he looked round.

"Where is my sister?" he said abruptly, almost rudely.

"Here," Madame la Marquise answered. Denise had flown long before to
her side, and was clinging to her.

"She is not hurt?"

"No," Madame answered, playfully tapping the girl's cheek. "M. de Saux
had most reason to complain."

"Save me from my friends, eh, Monsieur?" St. Alais said, with an
unpleasant smile.

I started. The words were not much in themselves, but the sneer
underlying them was plain. I could scarcely pass it by. "If you think,
M. le Marquis," I said sharply, "that I knew anything of this
outrage----"

"That you knew anything? _Ma foi_, no!" he replied lightly, and with
a courtly gesture of deprecation. "We have not fallen to that yet.
That any gentleman in this company should sink to play the fellow to
those--is not possible! But I think we may draw a useful lesson from
this, Messieurs," he continued, turning from me and addressing the
company. "And that is a lesson to hold our own, or we shall soon lose
all."

A hum of approbation ran round the room.

"To maintain privileges, or we shall lose rights."

Twenty voices were raised in assent.

"To stand now," he continued, his colour high, his hand raised, "or
never!"

"Then now! Now!"

The cry rose suddenly not from one, but from a hundred throats--of men
and women; in a moment the room catching his tone seemed to throb with
enthusiasm, with the pulse of resolve. Men's eyes grew bright under
the candles, they breathed quickly, and with heightened colour. Even
the weakest felt the influence; the fool who had prated of the social
contract and the rights of man was as loud as any. "Now! Now!" they
cried with one voice.

What followed on that I have never completely fathomed; nor whether it
was a thing arranged, or merely an inspiration, born of the common
enthusiasm. But while the windows still shook with that shout, and
every eye was on him, M. de Alais stepped forward, the most gallant
and perfect figure, and with a splendid gesture drew his sword.

"Gentlemen!" he cried, "we are of one mind, of one voice. Let us be
also in the fashion. If, while all the world is fighting to get and
hold, we alone stand still and on the defensive--we court attack, and,
what is worse, defeat! Let us unite then, while it is still time, and
show that, in Quercy at least, our Order will stand or fall together.
You have heard of the oath of the Tennis Court and the 20th of June.
Let us, too, take an oath--this 22nd of July; not with uplifted hands
like a club of wordy debaters, promising all things to all men; but
with uplifted swords. As nobles and gentlemen, let us swear to stand
by the rights, the privileges, and the exemptions of our Order!"

A shout that made the candles flicker and jump, that filled the
street, and was heard even in the distant market-place, greeted the
proposal. Some drew their swords at once, and flourished them above
their heads; while ladies waved their fans or kerchiefs. But the
majority cried, "To the larger room! To the larger room!" And on the
instant, as if in obedience to an order, the company turned that way,
and flushed, and eager, pressed through the narrow doorway into the
next room.

There may have been some among them less enthusiastic than others;
some more earnest in show than at heart; none, I am sure, who, on
this, followed so slowly, so reluctantly, with so heavy a heart, and
sure a presage of evil as I did. Already I foresaw the dilemma before
me; but angry, hot-faced, and uncertain, I could discern no way out of
it.

If I could have escaped, and slipped clear from the room, I would have
done so without scruple; but the stairs were on the farther side of
the great room which we were entering, and a dense crowd cut me off
from them; moreover, I felt that St. Alais' eye was upon me, and that,
if he had not framed the ordeal to meet my case, and extort my
support, he was at least determined, now that his blood was fired,
that I should not evade it.

Still I would not hasten the evil day, and I lingered near the inner
door, hoping; but the Marquis, on reaching the middle of the room,
mounted a chair and turned round; and so contrived still to face me.
The mob of gentlemen formed themselves round him, the younger and more
tumultuous uttering cries of "_Vive la Noblesse!_" And a fringe of
ladies encircled all. The lights, the brilliant dresses and jewels on
which they shone, the impassioned faces, the waving kerchiefs and
bright eyes, rendered the scene one to be remembered, though at the
moment I was conscious only of St. Alais' gaze.

"Messieurs," he cried, "draw your swords, if you please!"

They flashed out at the word, with a steely glitter which the mirrors
reflected; and M. de St. Alais passed his eye slowly round, while all
waited for the word. He stopped; his eye was on me.

"M. de Saux," he said politely, "we are waiting for you."

Naturally all turned to me. I strove to mutter something, and signed
to him with my hand to go on. But I was too much confused to speak
clearly; my only hope was that he would comply, out of prudence.

But that was the last thing he thought of doing. "Will you take your
place, Monsieur?" he said smoothly.

Then I could escape no longer. A hundred eyes, some impatient, some
merely curious, rested on me. My face burned.

"I cannot do so," I answered.

There fell a great silence from one end of the room to the other.

"Why not, Monsieur, if I may ask?" St. Alais said still smoothly.

"Because I am not--entirely at one with you," I stammered, meeting all
eyes as bravely as I could. "My opinions are known, M. de St. Alais,"
I went on more steadfastly. "I cannot swear."

He stayed with his hand a dozen who would have cried out upon me.

"Gently, Messieurs," he said, with a gesture of dignity, "gently, if
you please. This is no place for threats. M. de Saux is my guest; and
I have too great a respect for him not to respect his scruples. But I
think that there is another way. I shall not venture to argue with him
myself. But--Madame," he continued, smiling as he turned with an
inimitable air to his mother, "I think that if you would permit
Mademoiselle de St. Alais to play the recruiting-sergeant--for this
one time--she could not fail to heal the breach."

A murmur of laughter and subdued applause, a flutter of fans and
women's eyes greeted the proposal. But, for a moment, Madame la
Marquise, smiling and sphinx-like, stood still, and did not speak.
Then she turned to her daughter, who, at the mention of her name, had
cowered back, shrinking from sight.

"Go, Denise," she said simply. "Ask M. de Saux to honour you by
becoming your recruit."

The girl came forward slowly, and with a visible tremor; nor shall I
ever forget the misery of that moment, or the shame and obstinacy that
alternately surged through my brain as I awaited her. Thought, quicker
than lightning, showed me the trap into which I had fallen, a trap far
more horrible than the dilemma I had foreseen. Nor was the poor girl
herself, as she stood before me, tortured by shyness, and stammering
her little petition in words barely intelligible, the least part of my
pain.

For to refuse her, in face of all those people, seemed a thing
impossible. It seemed a thing as brutal as to strike her; an act as
cruel, as churlish, as unworthy of a gentleman as to trample any
helpless sensitive thing under foot! And I felt that; I felt it to the
utmost. But I felt also that to assent was to turn my back on
consistency, and my life; to consent to be a dupe, the victim of a
ruse; to be a coward, though every one there might applaud me. I saw
both these things, and for a moment I hesitated between rage and pity;
while lights and fair faces, inquisitive or scornful, shifted mazily
before my eyes. At last--

"Mademoiselle, I cannot," I muttered. "I cannot."

"Monsieur!"

It was not the girl's word, but Madame's, and it rang high and sharp
through the room; so that I thanked God for the intervention. It
cleared in a moment the confusion from my brain. I became myself. I
turned to her; I bowed.

"No, Madame, I cannot," I said firmly, doubting no longer, but
stubborn, defiant, resolute. "My opinions are known. And I will not,
even for Mademoiselle's sake, give the lie to them."

As the last word fell from my lips, a glove, flung by an unseen hand,
struck me on the cheek; and then for a moment the room seemed to go
mad. Amid a storm of hisses, of "_Vaurien!_" and "_A bas le tratre!_"
a dozen blades were brandished in my face, a dozen challenges were
flung at my head. I had not learned at that time how excitable is a
crowd, how much less merciful than any member of it; and surprised and
deafened by the tumult, which the shrieks of the ladies did not tend
to diminish, I recoiled a pace.

M. de St. Alais took advantage of the moment. He sprang down, and
thrusting aside the blades which threatened me, flung himself in front
of me.

"Messieurs, listen!" he cried, above the uproar. "Listen, I beg! This
gentleman is my guest. He is no longer of us, but he must go unharmed.
A way! A way, if you please, for M. le Vicomte de Saux."

They obeyed him reluctantly, and falling back to one side or the
other, opened a way across the room to the door. He turned to me, and
bowed low--his courtliest bow.

"This way, Monsieur le Vicomte, if you please," he said. "Madame la
Marquise will not trespass on your time any longer."

I followed him with a burning face, down the narrow lane of shining
parquet, under the chandelier, between the lines of mocking eyes; and
not a man interposed. In dead silence I followed him to the door.
There he stood aside, and bowed to me, and I to him; and I walked out
mechanically--walked out alone.

I passed through the lobby. The crowd of peeping, grinning lackeys
that filled it stared at me, all eyes; but I was scarcely conscious of
their impertinence or their presence. Until I reached the street, and
the cold air revived me, I went like a man stunned, and unable to
think. The blow had fallen on me so suddenly, so unexpectedly.

When I did come a little to myself, my first feeling was rage. I had
gone into M. de St. Alais' house that evening, possessing everything;
I came out, stripped of friends, reputation, my betrothed! I had gone
in, trusting to his friendship, the friendship that was a tradition in
our families; he had worsted me by a trick. I stood in the street, and
groaned as I thought of it; as I pictured the sorry figure I had cut
amongst them, and reflected on what was before me.

For, presently, I began to think that I had been a fool--that I should
have given way. I could not, as I stood in the street there, foresee
the future; nor know for certain that the old France was passing, and
that even now, in Paris, its death-knell had gone forth. I had to live
by the opinions of the people round me; to think, as I paced the
streets, how I should face the company to-morrow, and whether I should
fly, or whether I should fight. For in the meeting on the morrow----

Ah! the Assembly. The word turned my thoughts into a new channel. I
could have my revenge there. That I might not raise a jarring note
_there_, they had cajoled me, and when cajolery failed, had insulted
me. Well, I would show them that the new way would succeed no better
than the old, and that where they had thought to suppress a Saux they
had raised a Mirabeau. From this point I passed the night in a fever.
Resentment spurred ambition; rage against my caste, a love of the
people. Every sign of misery and famine that had passed before my eyes
during the day recurred now, and was garnered for use. The early
daylight found me still pacing my room, still thinking, composing,
reciting; when Andr, my old body-servant, who had been also my
father's, came at seven with a note in his hand, I was still in my
clothes.

Doubtless he had heard downstairs a garbled account of what had
occurred, and my cheek burned. I took no notice of his gloomy looks,
however, but, without speaking, I opened the note. It was not signed,
but the handwriting was Louis'.

"Go home," it ran, "and do not show yourself at the Assembly. They
will challenge you one by one; the event is certain. Leave Cahors at
once, or you are a dead man."

That was all! I smiled bitterly at the weakness of the man who could
do no more for his friend than this.

"Who gave it to you?" I asked Andr.

"A servant, Monsieur."

"Whose?"

But he muttered that he did not know; and I did not press him. He
assisted me to change my dress; when I had done, he asked me at what
hour I needed the horses.

"The horses! For what?" I said, turning and staring at him.

"To return, Monsieur."

"But I do not return to-day!" I said in cold displeasure. "Of what are
you speaking? We came only yesterday."

"True, Monsieur," he muttered, continuing to potter over my dressing
things, and keeping his back to me. "Still, it is a good day for
returning."

"You have been reading this note!" I cried wrathfully. "Who told you
that----"

"All the town knows!" he answered, shrugging his shoulders coolly. "It
is, 'Andr, take your master home!' and, 'Andr, you have a hot-pate
for a master,' and Andr this, and Andr that, until I am fairly
muddled! Gil has a bloody nose, fighting a Harincourt lad that called
Monsieur a fool; but for me, I am too old for fighting. And there is
one other thing I am too old for," he continued, with a sniff.

"What is that, impertinent?" I cried.

"To bury another master."

I waited a minute. Then I said: "You think that I shall be killed?"

"It is the talk of the town!"

I thought a moment. Then: "You served my father, Andr," I said.

"Ah! Monsieur."

"Yet you would have me run away?"

He turned to me, and flung up his hands in despair.

"_Mon Dieu!_" he cried, "I don't know what I would have! We are ruined
by these _canaille_. As if God made them to do anything but dig and
work; or we could do without poor! If you had never taken up with
them, Monsieur----"

"Silence, man!" I said sternly. "You know nothing about it. Go down
now, and another time be more careful. You talk of the _canaille_ and
the poor! What are you yourself?"

"I, Monsieur?" he cried, in astonishment.

"Yes--you!"

He stared at me a moment with a face of bewilderment. Then slowly and
sorrowfully he shook his head, and went out. He began to think me mad.

When he was gone I did not at once move. I fancied it likely that if I
showed myself in the streets before the Assembly met, I should be
challenged, and forced to fight. I waited, therefore, until the hour
of meeting was past; waited in the dull upper room, feeling the
bitterness of isolation, and thinking, sometimes of Louis St. Alais,
who had let me go, and spoken no word in my behalf, sometimes of men's
unreasonableness; for in some of the provinces half of the nobility
were of my way of thinking. I thought of Saux, too; and I will not say
that I felt no temptation to adopt the course which Andr had
suggested--to withdraw quietly thither, and then at some later time,
when men's minds were calmer, to vindicate my courage. But a certain
stubbornness, which my father had before me, and which I have heard
people say comes of an English strain in the race, conspired with
resentment to keep me in the way I had marked out. At a quarter past
ten, therefore, when I thought that the last of the Members would have
preceded me to the Assembly, I went downstairs, with hot cheeks, but
eyes that were stern enough; and finding Andr and Gil waiting at the
door, bade them follow me to the Chapter House beside the Cathedral,
where the meetings were held.

Afterwards I was told that, had I used my eyes, I must have noticed
the excitement which prevailed in the streets; the crowd, dense, yet
silent, that filled the Square and all the neighbouring ways; the air
of expectancy, the closed shops, the cessation of business, the
whispering groups in alleys and at doors. But I was wrapped up in
myself, like one going on a forlorn hope; and of all remarked only one
thing--that as I crossed the Square a man called out, "God bless you,
Monsieur!" and another, "_Vive Saux!_" and that thereon a dozen or
more took off their caps. This I did notice; but mechanically only.
The next moment I was in the entry which leads alongside one wall of
the Cathedral to the Chapter House, and a crowd of clerks and
servants, who blocked it almost from wall to wall, were making way for
me to pass; not without looks of astonishment and curiosity.

Threading my way through them, I entered the empty vestibule, kept
clear by two or three ushers. Here the change from sunshine to shadow,
from the life and light and stir which prevailed outside, to the
silence of this vaulted chamber, was so great that it struck a chill
to my heart. Here, in the greyness and stillness, the importance of
the step I was about to take, the madness of the challenge I was about
to fling down, in the teeth of my brethren, rose before me; and if my
mind had not been braced to the utmost by resentment and obstinacy, I
must have turned back. But already my feet rang noisily on the stone
pavement, and forbade retreat. I could hear a monotonous voice droning
in the Chamber beyond the closed door; and I crossed to that door,
setting my teeth hard, and preparing myself to play the man, whatever
awaited me.

Another moment, and I should have been inside. My hand was already on
the latch, when some one, who had been sitting on the stone bench in
the shadow under the window, sprang up, and hurried to stop me. It was
Louis de St. Alais. He reached me before I could open the door, and,
thrusting himself in front of me, set his back against the panels.

"Stop, man! for God's sake, stop!" he cried passionately, yet kept his
voice low. "What can one do against two hundred? Go back, man, go
back, and I will----"

"_You will!_" I answered with fierce contempt, yet in the same low
tone--the ushers were staring curiously at us from the door by which I
had entered. "You will? You will do, I suppose, as much as you did
last night, Monsieur."

"Never mind that now!" he answered earnestly; though he winced, and
the colour rose to his brow. "Only go! Go to Saux, and----"

"Keep out of the way!"

"Yes," he said, "and keep out of the way. If you will do that----"

"Keep out of the way?" I repeated savagely.

"Yes, yes; then everything will blow over."

"Thank you!" I said slowly; and I trembled with rage. "And how much,
may I ask, are you to have, M. le Comte, for ridding the Assembly of
me?"

He stared at me. "Adrien!" he cried.

But I was ruthless. "No, Monsieur le Comte--not Adrien!" I said
proudly; "I am that only to my friends."

"And I am no longer one?"

I raised my eyebrows contemptuously. "_After last night?_" I said.
"After last night? Is it possible, Monsieur, that you fancy you played
a friendly part? I came into your house, your guest, your friend, your
all but relative; and you laid a trap for me, you held me up to
ridicule and odium, you----"

"I did?" he exclaimed.

"Perhaps not with your own voice. But you stood by and saw it done!
You stood by and said no word for me! You stood by and raised no
finger for me! If you call that friendship----"

He stopped me with a gesture full of dignity. "You forget one thing,
M. le Vicomte," he said, in a tone of proud reticence.

"Name it!" I answered disdainfully.

"That Mademoiselle de St. Alais is my sister!"

"Ah!"

"And that, whether the fault was yours or not, you last evening
treated her lightly--before two hundred people! You forget that, M. le
Vicomte."

"I treated her lightly?" I replied, in a fresh excess of rage. We had
moved, as if by common consent, a little from the door, and by this
time were glaring into one another's eyes. "And with whom lay the
fault if I did? With whom lay the fault, Monsieur? You gave me the
choice--nay, you forced me to make choice between slighting her and
giving up opinions and convictions which I hold, in which I have been
bred, in which----"

"_Opinions!_" he said more harshly than he had yet spoken. "And what
are, after all, opinions? Pardon me, I see that I annoy you, Monsieur.
But I am not philosophic; I have not been to England; and I cannot
understand a man----"

"Giving up anything for his opinions!" I cried, with a savage sneer.
"No, Monsieur, I daresay you cannot. If a man will not stand by his
friends he will not stand by his opinions. To do either the one or the
other, M. le Comte, a man must not be a coward."

He grew pale, and looked at me strangely. "Hush, Monsieur!" he
said--involuntarily, it seemed to me. And a spasm crossed his face, as
if a sharp pain shot through him.

But I was beside myself with passion. "A coward!" I repeated. "Do you
understand me, M. le Comte? Or do you wish me to go inside and repeat
the word before the Assembly?"

"There is no need," he said, growing as red as he had before been
pale.

"There should be none," I answered, with a sneer. "May I conclude that
you will meet me after the Assembly rises?"

He bowed without speaking; and then, and not till then, something in
his silence and his looks pierced the armour of my rage; and on a
sudden I grew sick at heart, and cold. It was too late, however; I had
said that which could never be unsaid. The memory of his patience, of
his goodness, of his forbearance, came after the event. I saluted him
formally; he replied; and I turned grimly to the door again.

But I was not to pass through it yet.

A second time when I had the latch in my grasp, and the door an inch
open, a hand plucked me back; so forcibly, that the latch rattled as
it fell, and I turned in a rage. To my astonishment it was Louis
again, but with a changed face--a face of strange excitement. He
retained his hold on me.

"No," he said, between his teeth. "You have called me a coward, M. le
Vicomte, and I will not wait! Not an hour. You shall fight me now.
There is a garden at the back, and----"

But I had grown as cold as he hot. "I shall do nothing of the kind," I
said, cutting him short. "After the Assembly----"

He raised his hand and deliberately struck me with his glove across
the face.

"Will that persuade you, then?" he said, as I involuntarily recoiled.
"After that, Monsieur, if you are a gentleman, you will fight me.
There is a garden at the back, and in ten minutes----"

"In ten minutes the Assembly may have risen," I said.

"I will not keep you so long!" he answered sternly. "Come, sir! Or
must I strike you again?"

"I will come," I said slowly. "After you, Monsieur."




                             CHAPTER III.

                           IN THE ASSEMBLY.


The blow, and the insult with which he accompanied it, put an end for
the moment to my repentance. But short as was the distance across the
floor from the one door to the other, it gave me time to think again;
to remember that this was Louis; and that whatever cause I had had to
complain of him, whatever grounds to suspect that he was the tool of
others, no friend could have done more to assuage my wrath, nor the
most honest more to withhold me from entering on an impossible task.
Melting quickly, melting almost instantly, I felt with a kind of
horror that if kindness alone had led him to interpose, I had made him
the worst return in the world; in fine, before the outer door could be
opened to us, I repented anew. When the usher held it for me to pass,
I bade him close it, and, to Louis' surprise, turned, and, muttering
something, ran back. Before he could do more than utter a cry I was
across the vestibule; a moment, and I had the door of the Assembly
open.

Instantly I saw before me--I suppose that my hand had raised the latch
noisily--tiers of surprised faces all turned my way. I heard a murmur
of mingled annoyance and laughter. The next moment I was threading my
way to my place with the monotonous voice of the President in my ears,
and the scene round me so changed--from that low-toned altercation
outside, to this Chamber full of light and life, and thronged with
starers--that I sank into my seat, dazzled and abashed; and almost
forgetful for the time of the purpose which brought me thither.

A little, and my face grew hotter still; and with good reason. Each of
the benches on which we sat held three. I shared mine with one of the
Harincourts and M. d'Aulnoy, my place being between them. I had
scarcely taken it five seconds, when Harincourt rose slowly, and,
without turning his face to me, moved away down the gangway, and,
fanning himself delicately with his hat, assumed a leaning position
against a desk with his gaze on the President. Half a minute, and
D'Aulnoy followed his example. Then the three behind me rose, and
quietly and without looking at me found other places. The three before
me followed suit. In two minutes I sat alone, isolated, a mark for all
eyes; a kind of leper in the Assembly!

I ought to have been prepared for some such demonstration. But I was
not, and my cheeks burned, as if the curious looks to which I was
exposed were a hot fire. It was impossible for me, taken by surprise,
to hide my embarrassment; for, wherever I gazed, I met sneering eyes
and contemptuous glances; and pride would not let me hang my head. For
many minutes, therefore, I was unconscious of everything but that
scorching gaze. I could not hear what was going forward. The
President's voice was a dull, meaningless drawl to me.

Yet all the while anger and resentment were hardening me in my
resolve; and, presently, the cloud passed from my mind, and left me
exulting. The monotonous reading, to which I had listened without
understanding it, came to an end, and was followed by short, sharp
interrogations--a question and an answer, a name and a reply. It was
that awoke me. The drawl had been the reading of the cahier; now they
were voting on it.

Presently it would be my turn; it was coming to my turn now. With each
vote--I need not say that all were affirmative--more faces, and yet
more, were turned to the place where I sat; more eyes, some hostile,
some triumphant, some merely curious, were directed to my face. Under
other circumstances this might have cowed me; now it did not. I was
wrought up to face it. The unfriendly looks of so many who had called
themselves my friends, the scornful glances of new men of ennobled
families, who had been glad of my father's countenance, the
consciousness that all had deserted me merely because I maintained in
practice opinions which half of them had proclaimed in words--these
things hardened me to a pitch of scorn no whit below that of my
opponents; while the knowledge that to blench now must cover me with
lasting shame closed the door to thoughts of surrender.

The Assembly, on the other hand, felt the novelty of its position. Men
were not yet accustomed to the war of the Senate; to duels of words
more deadly than those of the sword: and a certain doubt, a certain
hesitation, held the majority in suspense, watching to see what would
happen. Moreover, the leaders, both M. de St. Alais, who headed the
hotter and prouder party of the Court, and the nobles of the Robe and
Parliament, who had only lately discovered that their interest lay in
the same direction, found themselves embarrassed by the very smallness
of the opposition; since a substantial majority must have been
accepted as a fact, whereas one man--one man only standing in the way
of unanimity--presented himself as a thing to be removed, if the way
could be discovered.

"M. le Comte de Cantal?" the President cried, and looked, not at the
person he named, but at me.

"Content!"

"M. le Vicomte de Marignac?"

"Content!"

The next name I could not hear, for in my excitement it seemed that
all in the Chamber were looking at me, that voice was failing me, that
when the moment came I should sit dumb and paralysed, unable to speak,
and for ever disgraced. I thought of this, not of what was passing;
then, in a moment, self-control returned; I heard the last name before
mine, that of M. d'Aulnoy, heard the answer given. Then my own name,
echoing in hollow silence.

"M. le Vicomte de Saux?"

I stood up. I spoke, my voice sounding harsh, and like another man's.
"I dissent from this cahier!" I cried.

I expected an outburst of wrath; it did not come. Instead, a peal of
laughter, in which I distinguished St. Alais' tones, rang through the
room, and brought the blood to my cheeks. The laughter lasted some
time, rose and fell, and rose again; while I stood pilloried. Yet this
had one effect the laughers did not anticipate. On occasions the most
taciturn become eloquent. I forgot the periods from Rochefoucauld and
Liancourt, which I had so carefully prepared; I forgot the passages
from Turgot, of which I had made notes, and I broke out in a strain I
had not foreseen or intended.

"Messieurs!" I cried, hurling my voice through the Chamber, "I dissent
from this cahier because it is effete and futile; because, if for no
other reason, the time when it could have been of service is past. You
claim your privileges; they are gone! Your exemptions; they are gone!
You protest against the union of your representatives with those of
the people; but they have sat with them! They have sat with them, and
you can no more undo that by a protest than you can set back the tide!
The thing is done. The dog is hungry, you have given it a bone. Do you
think to get the bone back, unmouthed, whole, without loss? Then you
are mad. But this is not all, nor the principal of my objections to
this cahier. France to-day stands naked, bankrupt, without treasury,
without money. Do you think to help her, to clothe her, to enrich her,
by maintaining your privileges, by maintaining your exemptions, by
standing out for the last jot and tittle of your rights? No,
Messieurs. In the old days those exemptions, those rights, those
privileges, wherein our ancestors gloried, and gloried well, were
given to them because they were the buckler of France. They maintained
and armed and led men; the commonalty did the rest. But now the people
fight, the people pay, the people do all. Yes, Messieurs, it is true;
it is true that which we have all heard, '_Le manant paye pour
tout!_'"

I paused; expecting that now, at last, the long-delayed outburst of
anger would come. Instead, before any in the Chamber could speak,
there rose through the windows, which looked on the market-place, and
had been widely opened on account of the heat, a great cry of
applause; the shout of the street, that for the first time heard its
wrongs voiced. It was full of assent and rejoicing, yet no attack
could have disconcerted me more completely. I stood astonished, and
silenced.

The effect which it had on me was slight, however, in comparison with
that which it had on my opponents. The cries of dissent they were
about to utter died stillborn at the portent; and, for a moment, men
stared at one another as if they could not believe their ears. For
that moment a silence of rage, of surprise, prevailed through the
whole Chamber. Then M. de St. Alais sprang to his feet.

"What is this?" he cried, his handsome face dark with excitement. "Has
the King ordered us, too, to sit with the third estate? Has he so
humiliated us? If not, M. le President--if not, I say," he continued,
sternly putting down an attempt at applause, "and if this be not a
conspiracy between some of our body and the _canaille_ to bring about
another Jacquerie----"

The President, a weak man of a Robe family, interrupted him. "Have a
care, Monsieur," he said. "The windows are still open."

"Open?"

The President nodded.

"And what if they are? What of it?" St. Alais answered harshly. "What
of it, Monsieur?" he continued, looking round him with an eye which
seemed to collect and express the scorn of the more fiery spirits. "If
so, let it be so! Let them be open. Let the people hear both sides,
and not only those who flatter them; those who, by building on their
weakness and ignorance, and canting about their rights and our wrongs,
think to exalt themselves into Retzs and Cromwells! Yes, Monsieur le
President," he continued, while I strove in vain to interrupt him, and
half the Assembly rose to their feet in confusion, "I repeat the
phrase--who, to the ambition of a Cromwell or a Retz add their
violence, not their parts!"

The injustice of the reproach stung me, and I turned on him. "M. le
Marquis!" I cried hotly, "if, by that phrase, you refer to me----"

He laughed scornfully. "As you please, Monsieur," he said.

"I fling it back! I repudiate it!" I cried. "M. de St. Alais has
called me a Retz--a Cromwell----"

"Pardon me," he interposed swiftly; "a would-be Retz!"

"A traitor, either way!" I answered, striving against the laughter,
which at his repartee flashed through the room, bringing the blood
rushing to my face. "A traitor either way! But I say that he is the
traitor who to-day advises the King to his hurt."

"And not he who comes here with a mob at his back?" St. Alais
retorted, with heat almost equal to my own. "Who, one man, would
brow-beat a hundred, and dictate to this Assembly?"

"Monsieur repeats himself," I cried, cutting him short in my turn,
though no laughter followed my gibe. "I deny what he says. I fling
back his accusations; I retort upon him! And, for the rest, I object
to this cahier, I dissent from it, I----"

But the Assembly was at the end of its patience. A roar of "Withdraw!
withdraw!" drowned my voice, and, in a moment, the meeting so orderly
a few minutes before, became a scene of wild uproar. A few of the
elder men continued to keep their seats, but the majority rose; some
had already sprung to the windows, and closed them, and still stood
with their feet on the ledge, looking down on the confusion. Others
had gone to the door and taken their stand there, perhaps with the
idea of resisting intrusion. The President in vain cried for silence.
His voice, equally with mine, was lost in the persistent clamour,
which swelled to a louder pitch whenever I offered to speak, and sank
only when I desisted.

At length M. de St. Alais raised his hand, and with little difficulty
procured silence. Before I could take advantage of it, the President
interposed. "The Assembly of the noblesse of Quercy," he said
hurriedly, "is in favour of this cahier, maintaining our ancient
rights, privileges, and exemptions. The Vicomte de Saux alone
protests. The cahier will be presented."

"I protest!" I cried weakly.

"I have said so," the President answered, with a sneer. And a peal of
derisive laughter, mingled with shouts of applause, ran round the
Chamber. "The cahier will be presented. The matter is concluded."

Then, in a moment, magically, as it seemed to me, the Chamber resumed
its ordinary aspect. The Members who had risen returned to their
seats, those who had closed the windows descended, a few retired, the
President proceeded with some ordinary business. Every trace of the
storm disappeared. In a twinkling all was as it had been.

Even where I sat; for no isolation, no division from my fellows could
exceed that in which I had sat before. But whereas before I had had my
weapon in reserve and my revenge in prospect, that was no longer so. I
had shot my bolt, and I sat miserable, fettered by the silence and the
strange glances that hemmed me in, and growing each moment more
depressed and more self-conscious; longing to escape, yet shrinking
from moving, even from looking about me.

In this condition not the least of my misery lay in the reflection
that I had done no good; that I had suffered for a quixotism, and
shown myself stubborn and obstinate to no purpose. Too late, I
considered that I might have maintained my principles and yet
conformed; I might have stated my convictions and waived them in
deference to the majority. I might have----

But alas! whatever I might have done, I had not done it; and the die
was cast. I had declared myself against my order; I had forfeited all
I could claim from my order. Henceforth, I was not of it. It was no
fancy that already men who had occasion to pass before me drew their
skirts aside and bowed formally as to one of another class!

How long I should have endured this penance--these veiled insults and
the courtesy that stung deeper--before I plucked up spirit to
withdraw, I cannot say. It was an interposition from without that
broke the spell. An usher came to me with a note. I opened it with
clumsy fingers under a fire of hostile eyes, and found that it was
from Louis.

"If you have a spark of honour"--it ran--"you will meet me, without a
moment's delay, in the garden at the back of the Chapter House. Do so,
and you may still call yourself a gentleman. Refuse, or delay even for
ten minutes, and I will publish your shame from one end of Quercy to
the other. He cannot call himself Adrien du Pont de Saux, who puts up
with a blow!"

I read it twice while the usher waited. The words had a cruel,
heartless ring in them; the taunting challenge was brutal in its
directness. Yet my heart grew soft as I read, and I had much ado to
keep the tears from my eyes--under all those eyes. For Louis did not
deceive me this time. This note, so unlike him, this desperate attempt
to draw me out, and save me from opponents more ruthless, were too
transparent to delude me; and, in a moment, the icy bands which had
been growing over me melted. I still sat alone; but I was not quite
deserted. I could hold up my head again, for I had a friend. I
remembered that, after all, through all, I was Adrien du Pont de Saux,
guiltless of aught worse than holding in Quercy opinions which the
Lameths and Mirabeaus, the Liancourts and Rochefoucaulds held in their
provinces; guiltless, I told myself, of aught besides standing for
right and justice.

But the usher waited. I took from the desk before me a scrap of paper,
and wrote my answer. "Adrien does not fight with Louis because St.
Alais struck Saux."

I wrapped it up and gave it to the usher; then I sat back a different
man, able to meet all eyes, with a heart armed against all
misfortunes. Friendship, generosity, love, still existed, though the
gentry of Quercy, the Gontauts, and Marignacs, sat aloof. Life would
still hold sweets, though the grass should grow in the walnut avenue,
and my shield should never quarter the arms of St. Alais.

So I took courage, stood up, and moved to go out. But the moment I did
so, a dozen Members sprang to their feet also; and, as I walked down
one gangway towards the door, they crowded down another parallel with
it; offensively, openly, with the evident intention of intercepting me
before I could escape. The commotion was so great that the President
paused in his reading to watch the result; while the mass of Members
who kept their places, rose that they might have a better view. I saw
that I was to be publicly insulted, and a fierce joy took the place of
every other feeling. If I went slowly, it was not through fear; the
pent-up passions of the last hour inspired me, and I would not have
hastened the climax for the world. I reached the foot of the gangway,
in another moment we must have come into collision, when an abrupt
explosion of voices, a great roar in the street, that penetrated
through the closed windows, brought us to a halt. We paused, listening
and glaring, while the few who had not stood up before, rose
hurriedly, and the President, startled and suspicious, asked what it
was.

For answer the sound rose again--dull, prolonged, shaking the windows;
a hoarse shout of triumph. It fell--not ceasing, but passing away into
the distance--and then once more it swelled up. It was unlike any
shout I had ever heard.

Little by little articulate words grew out of it, or succeeded it;
until the air shook with the measured rhythm of one stern sentence.
"_A bas la Bastille! A bas la Bastille!_"

We were to hear many such cries in the time to come, and grow
accustomed to such alarms; to the hungry roar in the street, and the
loud knocking at the door that spelled fate. But they were a new thing
then, and the Assembly, as much outraged as alarmed by this second
trespass on its dignity, could only look at its President, and mutter
wrathful threats against the _canaille_. The _canaille_ that had
crouched for a century seemed in some unaccountable way to be changing
its posture!

One man cried out one thing, and one another; that the streets should
be cleared, the regiment sent for, or complaint made to the Intendant.
They were still speaking when the door opened and a Member came in. It
was Louis de St. Alais, and his face was aglow with excitement.
Commonly the most modest and quiet of men, he stood forward now, and
raised his hand imperatively for silence.

"Gentlemen," he said, in a loud, ringing voice, "there is strange
news! A courier with letters for my brother, M. de St. Alais, has
spoken in the street. He brings strange tidings."

"What?" two or three cried.

"The Bastille has fallen!"

No one understood--how should they?--but all were silent. Then, "What
do you mean, M. St. Alais?" the President asked, in bewilderment; and
he raised his hand that the silence might be preserved. "The Bastille
has fallen? How? What is it?"

"It was captured on Tuesday by the mob of Paris," Louis answered
distinctly, his eyes bright, "and M. de Launay, the Governor, murdered
in cold blood."

"The Bastille captured? By the mob?" the President exclaimed
incredulously. "It is impossible, Monsieur. You must have
misunderstood."

Louis shook his head. "It is true, I fear," he said.

"And M. de Launay?"

"That too, I fear, M. le President."

Then, indeed, men looked at one another; startled, pale-faced, asking
each mute questions of his fellows; while in the street outside the
hum of disorder and rejoicing grew moment by moment more steady and
continuous. Men looked at each other alarmed, and could not believe.
The Bastille which had stood so many centuries, captured? The Governor
killed? Impossible, they muttered, impossible. For what, in that case,
was the King doing? What the army? What the Governor of Paris?

Old M. de Gontaut put the thought into words. "But the King?" he said,
as soon as he could get a hearing. "Doubtless his Majesty has already
punished the wretches?"

The answer came from an unexpected quarter, in words as little
expected. M. de St. Alais, to whom Louis had handed a letter, rose
from his seat with an open paper in his hand. Doubtless, if he had
taken time to consider, he would have seen the imprudence of making
public all he knew; but the surprise and mortification of the news he
had received--news that gave the lie to his confident assurances, news
that made the most certain doubt the ground on which they stood, swept
away his discretion. He spoke.

"I do not know what the King was doing," he said, in mocking accents,
"at Versailles; but I can tell you how the army was employed in Paris.
The Garde Franaise were foremost in the attack. Besenval, with such
troops as have not deserted, has withdrawn. The city is in the hands
of the mob. They have shot Flesselles, the Provost, and elected
Bailly, Mayor. They have raised a Militia and armed it. They have
appointed Lafayette, General. They have adopted a badge. They
have----"

"But, _mon Dieu!_" the President cried aghast. "This is a revolt!"

"Precisely, Monsieur," St. Alais answered.

"And what does the King?"

"He is so good--that he has done nothing," was the bitter answer.

"And the States General?--the National Assembly at Versailles?"

"Oh, they? They too have done nothing."

"It is Paris, then?" the President said.

"Yes, Monsieur, it is Paris," the Marquis answered. "But Paris?" the
President exclaimed helplessly. "Paris has been quiet so many years."

To this, however, the thought in every one's mind, there seemed to be
no answer. St. Alais sat down again, and, for a moment, the Assembly
remained stunned by astonishment, prostrate under these new, these
marvellous facts. No better comment on the discussions in which it had
been engaged a few minutes before could have been found. Its Members
had been dreaming of their rights, their privileges, their exemptions;
they awoke to find Paris in flames, the army in revolt, order and law
in the utmost peril.

But St. Alais was not the man to be long wanting to his part, nor one
to abdicate of his free will a leadership which vigour and audacity
had secured for him. He sprang to his feet again, and in an
impassioned harangue called upon the Assembly to remember the Fronde.

"As Paris was then, Paris is now!" he cried. "Fickle and seditious, to
be won by no gifts, but always to be overcome by famine. Best assured
that the fat bourgeois will not long do without the white bread of
Gonesse, nor the tippler without the white wine of Arbois! Cut these
off, the mad will grow sane, and the traitor loyal. Their National
Guards, and their Badges, and their Mayors, and their General? Do you
think that these will long avail against the forces of order, of
loyalty, against the King, the nobility, the clergy, against France?
No, gentlemen, it is impossible," he continued, looking round him with
warmth. "Paris would have deposed the great Henry and exiled Mazarin;
but in the result it licked their shoes. It will be so again, only we
must stand together, we must be firm. We must see that these disorders
spread no farther. It is the King's to govern, and the people's to
obey. It has been so, and it will be so to the end!"

His words were not many, but they were timely and vigorous; and they
served to reassure the Assembly. All that large majority, which in
every gathering of men has no more imagination than serves to paint
the future in the colours of the past, found his arguments perfectly
convincing; while the few who saw more clearly, and by the light of
instinct, or cold reason, discerned that the state of France had no
precedent in its history, felt, nevertheless, the infection of his
confidence. A universal shout of applause greeted his last sentence,
and, amid tumultuous cries, the concourse, which had remained on its
feet, poured into the gangways, and made for the door; a desire to see
and hear what was going forward moving all to get out as quickly as
possible, though it was not likely that more could be learned than was
already known.

I shared this feeling myself, and, forgetting in the excitement of the
moment my part in the day's debate, I pressed to the door. The
Bastille fallen? The Governor killed? Paris in the hands of the mob?
Such tidings were enough to set the brain in a whirl, and breed
forgetfulness of nearer matters. Others, in the preoccupation of the
moment, seemed to be equally oblivious, and I forced my way out with
the rest.

But in the doorway I happened, by a little clumsiness, to touch one of
the Harincourts. He turned his head, saw who it was had touched him,
and tried to stop. The pressure was too great, however, and he was
borne on in front of me, struggling and muttering something I could
not hear. I guessed what it was, however, by the manner in which
others, abreast of him, and as helpless, turned their heads and
sneered at me; and I was considering how I could best encounter what
was to come, when the sight which met our gaze, as we at last issued
from the narrow passage and faced the market-place--two steps below
us--drove their existence for a moment from my mind.




                             CHAPTER IV.

                           L'AMI DU PEUPLE.


There were others who stood also; impressed by a sight which, in the
light of the news we had just heard, that astonishing, that amazing
news, seemed to have especial significance. We had not yet grown
accustomed in France to crowds. For centuries the one man, the
individual, King, Cardinal, Noble, or Bishop, had stood forward, and
the many, the multitude, had melted away under his eye; had bowed and
passed.

But here, within our view, rose the cold lowering dawn of a new day.
Perhaps, if we had not heard what we had heard--that news, I mean--or
if the people had not heard it, the effect on us, the action on their
part, might have been different. As it was, the crowd that faced us in
the Square as we came out, the great crowd that faced us and stretched
from wall to wall, silent, vigilant, menacing, showed not a sign of
flinching; and we did. We stood astonished, each halting as he came
out, and looking, and then consulting his neighbour's eyes to learn
what he thought.

We had over our heads the great Cathedral, from the shadow of which we
issued. We had among us many who had been wont to see a hundred
peasants tremble at their frown. But in a moment, in a twinkling, as
if that news from Paris had shaken the foundations of Society, we
found these things in question. The crowd in the Square did not
tremble. In a silence that was grimmer than howling it gave back look
for look. Nor only that; but as we issued, they made no way for us,
and those of the Assembly who had already gone down, had to walk along
the skirts of the press to get to the inn. We who came later saw this,
and it had its weight with us. We were Nobles of the province; but we
were only two hundred, and between us and the Trois Rois, between us
and our horses and servants, stretched this line of gloomy faces,
these thousands of silent men.

No wonder that the sight, and something that underlay the sight,
diverted my mind for a moment from M. Harincourt and his purpose, and
that I looked abroad; while he, too, stood gaping and frowning, and
forgot me. Perforce we had to go down; one by one reluctantly, a
meagre string winding across the face of the crowd; sullen defiance on
one side, scorn on the other. In Cahors it came to be remembered as
the first triumph of the people, the first step in the degradation of
the privileged. A word had brought it about. A word, _the Bastille
fallen_, had combined the floating groups, and formed of them this
which we saw--the people.

Under such circumstances it needed only the slightest spark to bring
about an explosion; and that was presently supplied. M. de Gontaut, a
tall, thin, old man, who could remember the early days of the late
King, walked a little way in front of me. He was lame, and used a
cane, and as a rule a servant's arm. This morning, the lackey was not
forthcoming, and he felt the inconvenience of skirting instead of
crossing the square. Nevertheless he was not foolish enough to thrust
himself into the crowd; and all might have gone well, if a rogue in
the front rank of the throng had not, perhaps by accident, tripped up
the cane with his foot. M. le Baron turned in a flash, every hair of
his eyebrows on end, and struck the fellow with his stick.

"Stand back, rascal!" he cried, trembling, and threatening to repeat
the blow. "If I had you, I would soon----"

The man spat at him.

M. de Gontaut uttered an oath, and in ungovernable rage struck the
wretch two or three blows--how many I could not see, though I was only
a few paces behind. Apparently the man did not strike back, but
shrank, cowed by the old noble's fury. But those behind flung him
forward, with cries of "Shame! _A bas la Noblesse!_" and he fell
against M. de Gontaut. In a moment the Baron was on the ground.

It was so quickly done that only those in the immediate neighbourhood,
St. Alais, the Harincourts, and myself, saw the fall. Probably the mob
meant no great harm; they had not yet lost all reverence. But at the
time, with the tale of De Launay in my ears, and my imagination
inflamed, I thought that they intended M. de Gontaut's death, and as I
saw his old head fall, I sprang forward to protect him.

St. Alais was before me, however. Bounding forward, with rage not less
than Gontaut's, he hurled the aggressor back with a blow which sent
him into the arms of his supporters. Then dragging M. de Gontaut to
his feet, the Marquis whipped out his sword, and darting the bright
point hither and thither with the skill of a practised fencer, in a
twinkling he cleared a space round him, and made the nearest give back
with shrieks and curses.

Unfortunately he touched one man; the fellow was not hurt, but at the
prick he sank down screaming, and in a second the mood of the crowd
changed. Shrieks, half-playful, gave way to a howl of rage. Some one
flung a stick, which struck the Marquis on the chest, and for a moment
stopped him. The next instant he sprang at the man who had thrown it,
and would have run him through, but the fellow fled, and the crowd,
with a yell of triumph, closed over his path. This stopped St. Alais
in mid course, and left him only the choice between retreating, or
wounding people who were innocent.

He fell back with a sneering word, and sheathed his sword. But the
moment his back was turned a stone struck him on the head, and he
staggered forward. As he fell the crowd uttered a yell, and half a
dozen men dashed at him to trample on him.

Their blood was up; this time I made no mistake, I read mischief in
their eyes. The scream of the man whom he had wounded, though the
fellow was more frightened than hurt, was in their ears. One of the
Harincourts struck down the foremost, but this only enraged without
checking them. In a moment he was swept aside and flung back, stunned
and reeling; and the crowd rushed upon their victim.

I threw myself before him. I had just time to do that, and cry "Shame!
shame!" and force back one or two; and then my intervention must have
come to nothing, it must have fared as ill with me as with him, if in
the nick of time, with a ring of grimy faces threatening us, and a
dozen hands upraised, I had not been recognised. Buton, the blacksmith
of Saux--one of the foremost--screamed out my name, and turning with
outstretched arms, forced back his neighbours. A man of huge strength,
it was as much as he could do to stem the torrent; but in a moment his
frenzied cries became heard and understood. Others recognised me, the
crowd fell back. Some one raised a cry of "_Vive Saux!_ Long live the
friend of the people!" and the shout being taken up first in one place
and then in another, in a trice the Square rang with the words.

I had not then learned the fickleness of the multitude, or that from
_A bas_ to _vive_ is the step of an instant; and despite myself, and
though I despised myself for the feeling, I felt my heart swell on the
wave of sound. "_Vive Saux! Vive l'ami du peuple!_" My equals had
scorned me, but the people--the people whose faces wore a new look
to-day, the people to whom this one word, the Bastille fallen, had
given new life--acclaimed me. For a moment, even while I cried to
them, and shook my hands to them to be silent, there flashed on me the
things it meant; the things they had to give, power and tribuneship!
"_Vive Saux!_ long live the friend of the people!" The air shook with
the sound; the domes above me gave it back. I felt myself lifted up on
it; I felt myself for the minute another and a greater man!

Then I turned and met St. Alais' eye, and I fell to earth. He had
risen, and, pale with rage, was wiping the dust from his coat with a
handkerchief. A little blood was flowing from the wound in his head,
but he paid no heed to it, in the intentness with which he was staring
at me, as if he read my thoughts. As soon as something like silence
was obtained, he spoke.

"Perhaps if your friends have quite done with us, M. de Saux--we may
go home?" he said, his voice trembling a little.

I stammered something in answer to the sneer, and turned to accompany
him; though my way to the inn lay in the opposite direction. Only the
two Harincourts and M. de Gontaut were with us. The rest of the
Assembly had either got clear, or were viewing the fracas from the
door of the Chapter House, where they stood, cut off from us by a wall
of people. I offered my arm to M. de Gontaut, but he declined it with
a frigid bow, and took Harincourt's; and M. le Marquis, when I turned
to him, said, with a cold smile, that they need not trouble me.

"Doubtless we shall be safe," he sneered, "if you will give orders to
that effect."

I bowed, without retorting on him; he bowed; and he turned away. But
the crowd had either read his attitude aright, or gathered that there
was an altercation between us, for the moment he moved they set up a
howl. Two or three stones were thrown, notwithstanding Buton's efforts
to prevent it; and before the party had retired ten yards the rabble
began to press on them savagely. Embarrassed by M. de Gontaut's
presence and helplessness, the other three could do nothing. For an
instant I had a view of St. Alais standing gallantly at bay with the
old noble behind him, and the blood trickling down his cheek. Then I
followed them, the crowd made instant way for me, again the air rang
with cheers, and the Square in the hot July sunshine seemed a sea of
waving hands.

M. de St. Alais turned to me. He could still smile, and with
marvellous self-command, in one and the same instant he recovered from
his discomfiture and changed his tactics.

"I am afraid that after all we must trouble you," he said politely.
"M. le Baron is not a young man, and your people, M. de Saux, are
somewhat obstreperous."

"What can I do?" I said sullenly. I had not the heart to leave them to
their fortunes; at the same time I was as little disposed to accept
the onus he would lay on me.

"Accompany us home," he said pleasantly, drawing out his snuff-box and
taking a pinch.

The people had fallen silent again, but watched us heedfully. "If you
think it will serve?" I answered.

"It will," he said briskly. "You know, M. le Vicomte, that a man is
born and a man dies every minute? Believe me no King dies--but another
King is born."

I winced under the sarcasm, under the laughing contempt of his eye.
Yet I saw nothing for it but to comply, and I bowed and turned to go
with them. The crowd opened before us; amid mingled cheers and yells
we moved away. I intended only to accompany them to the outskirts of
the throng, and then to gain the inn by a by-path, get my horses and
be gone. But a party of the crowd continued to follow us through the
streets, and I found no opportunity. Almost before I knew it, we were
at the St. Alais' door, still with this rough attendance at our heels.

Madame and Mademoiselle, with two or three women, were on the balcony,
looking and listening; at the door below stood a group of scared
servants. While I looked, however, Madame left her place above and in
a moment appeared at the door, the servants making way for her. She
stared in wonder at us, and from us to the rabble that followed; then
her eye caught the bloodstains on M. de St. Alais' cravat, and she
cried out to know if he was hurt.

"No, Madame," he said lightly. "But M. de Gontaut has had a fall."

"What has happened?" she asked quickly. "The town seems to have gone
mad! I heard a great noise a while ago, and the servants brought in a
wild tale about the Bastille."

"It is true."

"What? That the Bastille----"

"Has been taken by the mob, Madame; and M. de Launay murdered."

"Impossible!" Madame cried with flashing eyes. "That old man?"

"Yes," M. de St. Alais answered with treacherous suavity. "Messieurs
the Mob are no respecters of persons. Fortunately, however," he went
on, smiling at me in a way that brought the blood to my cheeks, "they
have leaders more prudent and sagacious than themselves."

But Madame had no ears for his last words, no thought save of this
astonishing news from Paris. She stood, her cheeks on fire, her eyes
full of tears; she had known De Launay. "Oh, but the King will punish
them!" she cried at last. "The wretches! The ingrates! They should all
be broken on the wheel! Doubtless the King has already punished them."

"He will, by-and-by, if he has not yet," St. Alais answered. "But for
the moment, you will easily understand, Madame, that things are out of
joint. Men's heads are turned, and they do not know themselves. We
have had a little trouble here. M. de Gontaut has been roughly
handled, and I have not entirely escaped. If M. de Saux had not had
his people well in hand," he continued, turning to me with a laughing
eye, "I am afraid that we should have come off worse."

Madame stared at me, and, beginning slowly to comprehend, seemed to
freeze before me. The light died out of her haughty face. She looked
at me grimly. I had a glimpse of Mademoiselle's startled eyes behind
her, and of the peeping servants; then Madame spoke. "Are these some
of--M. de Saux's people?" she asked, stepping forward a pace, and
pointing to the crew of ruffians who had halted a few paces away, and
were watching us doubtfully.

"A handful," M. de St. Alais answered lightly. "Just his bodyguard,
Madame. But pray do not speak of him so harshly; for, being my mother,
you must be obliged to him. If he did not quite save my life, at least
he saved my beauty."

"With those?" she said scornfully.

"With those or from those," he answered gaily. "Besides, for a day or
two we may need his protection. I am sure that, if you ask him,
Madame, he will not refuse it."

I stood, raging and helpless, under the lash of his tongue; and Madame
de St. Alais looked at me. "Is it possible," she said at last, "that
M. de Saux has thrown in his lot with wretches such as those?" And she
pointed with magnificent scorn to the scowling crew behind me. "With
wretches who----"

"Hush, Madame," M. le Marquis said in his gibing fashion. "You are too
bold. For the moment they are our masters, and M. de Saux is theirs.
We must, therefore----"

"We must not!" she answered impetuously, raising herself to her full
height and speaking with flashing eyes. "What? Would you have me
palter with the scum of the streets? With the dirt under our feet?
With the sweepings of the gutter? Never! I and mine have no part with
traitors!"

"Madame!" I cried, stung to speech by her injustice. "You do not know
what you say! If I have been able to stand between your son and
danger, it has been through no vileness such as you impute to me."

"Impute?" she exclaimed. "What need of imputation, Monsieur, with
those wretches behind you? Is it necessary to cry '_A bas le roi!_' to
be a traitor? Is not that man as guilty who fosters false hopes, and
misleads the ignorant? Who hints what he dare not say, and holds out
what he dares not promise? Is he not the worst of traitors? For shame,
Monsieur, for shame!" she continued. "If your father----"

"Oh!" I cried. "This is intolerable!"

She caught me up with a bitter gibe. "It is!" she retorted. "It _is_
intolerable--that the King's fortresses should be taken by the rabble,
and old men slain by scullions! It is intolerable that nobles should
forget whence they are sprung, and stoop to the kennel! It is
intolerable that the King's name should be flouted, and catchwords set
above it! All these things are intolerable; but they are not of our
doing. They are your acts. And for you," she continued--and suddenly
stepping by me, she addressed the group of rascals who lingered,
listening and scowling, a few paces away--"for you, poor fools, do not
be deceived. This gentleman has told you, doubtless, that there is no
longer a King of France! That there are to be no more taxes nor
_corves_; that the poor will be rich, and everybody noble! Well,
believe him if you please. There have been poor and rich, noble and
simple, spenders and makers, since the world began, and a King in
France. But believe him if you please. Only now go! Leave my house.
Go, or I will call out my servants, and whip you through the streets
like dogs! To your kennels, I say!"

She stamped her foot, and to my astonishment, the men, who must have
known that her threat was an empty one, sneaked away like the dogs to
which she had compared them. In a moment--I could scarcely believe
it--the street was empty. The men who had come near to killing M. de
Gontaut, who had stoned M. de St. Alais, quailed before a woman! In a
twinkling the last man was gone, and she turned to me, her face
flushed, her eyes gleaming with scorn.

"There, sir," she said, "take that lesson to heart. That is your brave
people! And now, Monsieur, do you go too! Henceforth my house is no
place for you. I will have no traitors under my roof--no, not for a
moment."

She signed to me to go with the same insolent contempt which had
abashed the crowd; but before I went I said one word. "You were my
father's friend, Madame," I said before them all.

She looked at me harshly, but did not answer.

"It would have better become you, therefore," I continued, "to help me
than to hurt me. As it is, were I the most loyal of his Majesty's
subjects, you have done enough to drive me to treason. In the future,
Madame la Marquise, I beg that you will remember that."

And I turned and went, trembling with rage.

The crowd in the Square had melted by this time, but the streets were
full of those who had composed it; who now stood about in eager
groups, discussing what had happened. The word Bastille was on every
tongue; and, as I passed, way was made for me, and caps were lifted.
"God bless you, M. de Saux," and, "You are a good man," were muttered
in my ear. If there seemed to be less noise and less excitement than
in the morning, the air of purpose that everywhere prevailed was not
to be mistaken.

This was so clear that, though noon was barely past, shopkeepers had
closed their shops and bakers their bakehouses; and a calm, more
ominous than the storm that had preceded it, brooded over the town.
The majority of the Assembly had dispersed in haste, for I saw none of
the Members, though I heard that a large body had gone to the
barracks. No one molested me--the fall of the Bastille served me so
far--and I mounted, and rode out of town, without seeing any one, even
Louis.

To tell the truth, I was in a fever to be at home; in a fever to
consult the only man who, it seemed to me, could advise me in this
crisis. In front of me, I saw it plainly, stretched two roads; the one
easy and smooth, if perilous, the other arid and toilsome. Madame had
called me the Tribune of the People, a would-be Retz, a would-be
Mirabeau. The people had cried my name, had hailed me as a saviour.
Should I fit on the cap? Should I take up the _rle?_ My own caste had
spurned me. Should I snatch at the dangerous honour offered to me, and
stand or fall with the people?

With the people? It sounded well, but, in those days, it was a vaguer
phrase than it is now; and I asked myself who, that had ever taken up
that cause, had stood? A bread riot, a tumult, a local revolt--such
as this which had cost M. de Launay his life--of things of that size
the people had shown themselves capable; but of no lasting victory.
Always the King had held his own, always the nobles had kept their
privileges. Why should it be otherwise now?

There were reasons. Yes, truly; but they seemed less cogent, the
weight of precedent against them heavier, when I came to think, with a
trembling heart, of acting on them. And the odium of deserting my
order was no small matter to face. Hitherto I had been innocent; if
they had put out the lip at me, they had done it wrongfully. But if I
accepted this part, the part they assigned to me, I must be prepared
to face not only the worst in case of failure, but in success to be a
pariah. To be Tribune of the People, and an outcast from my kind!

I rode hard to keep pace with these thoughts; and I did not doubt that
I should be the first to bring the tale to Saux. But in those days
nothing was more marvellous than the speed with which news of this
kind crossed the country. It passed from mouth to mouth, from eye to
eye; the air seemed to carry it. It went before the quickest
traveller.

Everywhere, therefore, I found it known. Known by people who had stood
for days at cross-roads, waiting for they knew not what; known by
scowling men on village bridges, who talked in low voices and eyed the
towers of the Chteau; known by stewards and agents, men of the stamp
of Gargouf, who smiled incredulously, or talked, like Madame St.
Alais, of the King, and how good he was, and how many he would hang
for it. Known, last of all, by Father Benit, the man I would consult.
He met me at the gate of the Chteau, opposite the place where the
_carcan_ had stood. It was too dark to see his face, but I knew the
fall of his _soutane_ and the shape of his hat. I sent on Gil and
Andr, and he walked beside me up the avenue, with his hand on the
withers of my horse.

"Well, M. le Vicomte, it has come at last," he said.

"You have heard?"

"Buton told me."

"What? Is he here?" I said in surprise. "I saw him at Cahors less than
three hours ago."

"Such news gives a man wings," Father Benit answered with energy. "I
say again, it has come. It has come, M. le Vicomte."

"Something," I said prudently.

"Everything," he answered confidently. "The mob took the Bastille, but
who headed them? The soldiers; the Garde Franaise. Well, M. le
Vicomte, if the army cannot be trusted, there is an end of abuses, an
end of exemptions, of extortions, of bread famines, of Foulons and
Berthiers, of grinding the faces of the poor, of----"

The Cur's list was not half exhausted when I cut it short. "But if
the army is with the mob, where will things stop?" I said wearily.

"We must see to that," he answered.

"Come and sup with me," I said, "I have something to tell you, and
more to ask you."

He assented gladly. "For there will be no sleep for me to-night," he
said, his eye sparkling. "This is great news, glorious news, M. le
Vicomte. Your father would have heard it with joy."

"And M. de Launay?" I said as I dismounted.

"There can be no change without suffering," he answered stoutly,
though his face fell a little. "His fathers sinned, and he has paid
the penalty. But God rest his soul! I have heard that he was a good
man."

"And died in his duty," I said rather tartly.

"Amen," Father Benit answered.

Yet it was not until we were sat down in the Chestnut Parlour (which
the servants called the English Room), and, with candles between us,
were busy with our cheese and fruit, that I appreciated to the full
the impression which the news had made on the Cur. Then, as he
talked, as he told and listened, his long limbs and lean form trembled
with excitement; his thin face worked. "It is the end," he said. "You
may depend upon it, M. le Vicomte, it is the end. Your father told me
many times that in money lay the secret of power. Money, he used to
say, pays the army, the army secures all. A while ago the money
failed. Now the army fails. There is nothing left."

"The King?" I said, unconsciously quoting Madame la Marquise.

"God bless his Majesty!" the Cur answered heartily. "He means well,
and now he will be able to do well, because the nation will be with
him. But without the nation, without money or an army--a name only.
And the name did not save the Bastille."

Then, beginning with the scene at Madame de St. Alais' reception, I
told him all that had happened to me; the oath of the sword, the
debate in the Assembly, the tumult in the Square--last of all, the
harsh words with which Madame had given me my _cong_; all. As he
listened he was extraordinarily moved. When I described the scene in
the Chamber, he could not be still, but in his enthusiasm, walked
about the parlour, muttering. And, when I told him how the crowd had
cried "_Vive Saux!_" he repeated the words softly and looked at me
with delighted eyes. But when I came--halting somewhat in my speech,
and colouring and playing with my bread to hide my disorder--to tell
him my thoughts on the way home, and the choice that, as it seemed to
me, was offered to me, he sat down, and fell also to crumbling his
bread and was silent.




                              CHAPTER V.

                           THE DEPUTATION.


He sat silent so long, with his eyes on the table, that presently I
grew nettled; wondering what ailed him, and why he did not speak and
say the things that I expected. I had been so confident of the advice
he would give me, that, from the first, I had tinged my story with the
appropriate colour. I had let my bitterness be seen; I had suppressed
no scornful word, but supplied him with all the ground he could desire
for giving me the advice I supposed to be upon his lips.

And yet he did not speak. A hundred times I had heard him declare his
sympathy with the people, his hatred of the corruption, the
selfishness, the abuses of the Government; within the hour I had seen
his eye kindle as he spoke of the fall of the Bastille. It was at his
word I had burned the _carcan_; at his instance I had spent a large
sum in feeding the village during the famine of the past year. Yet
now--now, when I expected him to rise up and bid me do my part, he was
silent!

I had to speak at last. "Well?" I said irritably. "Have you nothing to
say, M. le Cur?" And I moved one of the candles so as to get a better
view of his features. But he still looked down at the table, he still
avoided my eye, his thin face thoughtful, his hand toying with the
crumbs.

At last, "M. le Vicomte," he said softly, "through my mother's mother
I, too, am noble."

I gasped; not at the fact with which I was familiar, but at the
application I thought he intended. "And for that," I said amazed, "you
would----"

He raised his hand to stop me. "No," he said gently, "I would not.
Because, for all that, I am of the people by birth, and of the poor by
my calling. But----"

"But what?" I said peevishly.

Instead of answering me he rose from his seat, and, taking up one of
the candles, turned to the panelled wall behind him, on which hung a
full-length portrait of my father, framed in a curious border of
carved foliage. He read the name below it. "Antoine du Pont, Vicomte
de Saux," he said, as if to himself. "He was a good man, and a friend
to the poor. God keep him."

He lingered a moment, gazing at the grave, handsome face, and
doubtless recalling many things; then he passed, holding the candle
aloft, to another picture which flanked the table: each wall boasted
one. "Adrien du Pont, Vicomte de Saux," he read, "Colonel of the
Regiment Flamande. He was killed, I think, at Minden. Knight of St.
Louis and of the King's Bedchamber. A handsome man, and doubtless a
gallant gentleman. I never knew him."

I answered nothing, but my face began to burn as he passed to a third
picture behind me. "Antoine du Pont, Vicomte de Saux," he read,
holding up the candle, "Marshal and Peer of France, Knight of the
King's Orders, a Colonel of the Household and of the King's Council.
Died of the plague at Genoa in 1710. I think I have heard that he
married a Rohan."

He looked long, then passed to the fourth wall, and stood a moment
quite silent. "And this one?" he said at last. "He, I think, has the
noblest face of all. Antoine, Seigneur du Pont de Saux, of the Order
of St. John of Jerusalem, Preceptor of the French tongue. Died at
Valetta in the year after the Great Siege--of his wounds, some say; of
incredible labours and exertions, say the Order. A Christian soldier."

It was the last picture, and, after gazing at it a moment, he brought
the candle back and set it down with its two fellows on the shining
table; that, with the panelled walls, swallowed up the light, and left
only our faces white and bright, with a halo round them, and darkness
behind them. He bowed to me. "M. le Vicomte," he said at last, in a
voice which shook a little, "you come of a noble stock."

I shrugged my shoulders. "It is known," I said. "And for that?"

"I dare not advise you."

"But the cause is good!" I cried.

"Yes," he answered slowly. "I have been saying so all my life. I dare
not say otherwise now. But--the cause of the people is the people's.
Leave it to the people."

"_You_ say that!" I answered, staring at him, angry and perplexed.
"You, who have told me a hundred times that I am of the people! that
the nobility are of the people; that there are only two things in
France, the King and the people."

He smiled somewhat sadly; tapping on the table with his fingers. "That
was theory," he said. "I try to put it into practice, and my heart
fails me. Because I, too, have a little nobility, M. le Vicomte, and
know what it is."

"I don't understand you," I said in despair. "You blow hot and cold,
M. le Cur. I told you just now that I spoke for the people at the
meeting of the noblesse, and you approved."

"It was nobly done."

"Yet now?"

"I say the same thing," Father Benit answered, his fine face
illumined with feeling. "It was nobly done. Fight for the people, M.
le Vicomte, but among your fellows. Let your voice be heard there,
where all you will gain for yourself will be obloquy and black looks.
But if it comes, if it has come, to a struggle between your class and
the commons, between the nobility and the vulgar; if the noble must
side with his fellows or take the people's pay, then"--Father Benit's
voice trembled a little, and his thin white hand tapped softly on the
table--"I would rather see you ranked with your kind."

"Against the people?"

"Yes, against the people," he answered, shrinking a little.

I was astonished. "Why, great heaven," I said, "the smallest
logic----"

"Ah!" he answered, shaking his head sadly, and looking at me with kind
eyes. "There you beat me; logic is against me. Reason, too. The cause
of the people, the cause of reform, of honesty, of cheap grain, of
equal justice, _must_ be a good one. And who forwards it must be in
the right. That is so, M. le Vicomte. Nay, more than that. If the
people are left to fight their battle alone the danger of excesses is
greater. I see that. But instinct does not let me act on the
knowledge."

"Yet, M. de Mirabeau?" I said. "I have heard you call him a great
man."

"It is true," Father Benit answered, keeping his eyes on mine, while
he drummed softly on the table with his fingers.

"I have heard you speak of him with admiration."

"Often."

"And of M. de Lafayette?"

"Yes."

"And the Lameths?"

M. le Cur nodded.

"Yet all these," I said stubbornly, "all these are nobles--nobles
leading the people!"

"Yes," he said.

"And you do not blame them?"

"No, I do not blame them."

"Nay, you admire them! You admire them, Father," I persisted,
glowering at him.

"I know I do," he said. "I know that I am weak and a fool. Perhaps
worse, M. le Vicomte, in that I have not the courage of my
convictions. But, though I admire those men, though I think them great
and to be admired, I have heard men speak of them who thought
otherwise; and--it may be weak--but I knew you as a boy, and I would
not have men speak so of you. There are things we admire at a
distance," he continued, looking at me a little drolly, to hide the
affection that shone in his eyes, "which we, nevertheless, do not
desire to find in those we love. Odium heaped on a stranger is nothing
to us; on our friends, it were worse than death."

He stopped, his voice trembling; and we were both silent for a while.
Still, I would not let him see how much his words had touched me; and
by-and-by----

"But my father?" I said. "He was strongly on the side of reform!"

"Yes, by the nobles, for the people."

"But the nobles have cast me out!" I answered. "Because I have gone a
yard, I have lost all. Shall I not go two, and win all back?"

"Win all," he said softly--"but lose how much?"

"Yet if the people win? And you say they will?"

"Even then, Tribune of the People," he answered gently, "and an
outcast!"

They were the very words I had applied to myself as I rode; and I
started. With sudden vividness I saw the picture they presented; and I
understood why Father Benit had hesitated so long in my case. With
the purest intentions and the most upright heart, I could not make
myself other than what I was; I should rise, were my efforts crowned
with success, to a point of splendid isolation; suspected by the
people, whose benefactor I had been, hated and cursed by the nobles
whom I had deserted.

Such a prospect would have been far from deterring some; and others it
might have lured. But I found myself, in this moment of clear vision,
no hero. Old prejudices stirred in the blood, old traditions, born of
centuries of precedence and privilege, awoke in the memory. A shiver
of doubt and mistrust--such as, I suppose, has tormented reformers
from the first, and caused all but the hardiest to flinch--passed
through me, as I gazed across the candles at the Cur. I feared the
people--the unknown. The howl of exultation, that had rent the air in
the Market-place at Cahors, the brutal cries that had hailed Gontaut's
fall, rang again in my ears. I shrank back, as a man shrinks who finds
himself on the brink of an abyss, and through the wavering mist,
parted for a brief instant by the wind, sees the cruel rocks and
jagged points that wait for him below.

It was a moment of extraordinary prevision, and though it passed, and
speedily left me conscious once more of the silent room and the good
Cur--who affected to be snuffing one of the long candles--the effect
it produced on my mind continued. After Father Benit had taken his
leave, and the house was closed, I walked for an hour up and down the
walnut avenue; now standing to gaze between the open iron gates that
gave upon the road; now turning my back on them, and staring at the
grey, gaunt, steep-roofed house with its flanking tower and round
_tourelles_.

Henceforth, I made up my mind, I would stand aside. I would welcome
reform, I would do in private what I could to forward it; but I would
not a second time set myself against my fellows. I had had the courage
of my opinions. Henceforth, no man could say that I had hidden them,
but after this I would stand aside and watch the course of events.

A cock crowed at the rear of the house--untimely; and across the
hushed fields, through the dusk, came the barking of a distant dog. As
I stood listening, while the solemn stars gazed down, the slight which
St. Alais had put upon me dwindled--dwindled to its true dimensions. I
thought of Mademoiselle Denise, of the bride I had lost, with a faint
regret that was almost amusement. What would she think of this sudden
rupture? I wondered. Of this strange loss of her _fianc?_ Would it
awaken her curiosity, her interest? Or would she, fresh from her
convent school, think that things in the world went commonly so--that
_fiancs_ came and passed, and receptions found their natural end in
riot?

I laughed softly, pleased that I had made up my mind. But, had I
known, as I listened to the rustling of the poplars in the road, and
the sounds that came out of the darkened world beyond them, what was
passing there--had I known that, I should have felt even greater
satisfaction. For this was Wednesday, the 22nd of July; and that night
Paris still palpitated after viewing strange things. For the first
time she had heard the horrid cry, "_A la lanterne!_" and seen a man,
old and white-headed, hanged, and tortured, until death freed him. She
had seen another, the very Intendant of the City, flung down, trampled
and torn to pieces in his own streets--publicly, in full day, in the
presence of thousands. She had seen these things, trembling; and other
things also--things that had made the cheeks of reformers grow pale,
and betrayed to all thinking men that below Lafayette, below Bailly,
below the Municipality and the Electoral Committee, roared and seethed
the awakened forces of the Faubourgs, of St. Antoine, and St. Marceau!

What could be expected, what was to be expected, but that such
outrages, remaining unpunished, should spread? Within a week the
provinces followed the lead of Paris. Already, on the 21st the mob of
Strasbourg had sacked the Htel de Ville and destroyed the Archives;
and during the same week, the Bastilles at Bordeaux and Caen were
taken and destroyed. At Rouen, at Rennes, at Lyons, at St. Malo, were
great riots, with fighting; and nearer Paris, at Poissy, and St.
Germain, the populace hung the millers. But, as far as Cahors was
concerned, it was not until the astonishing tidings of the King's
surrender reached us, a few days later--tidings that on the 17th of
July he had entered insurgent Paris, and tamely acquiesced in the
destruction of the Bastille--it was not until that news reached us,
and hard on its heels a rumour of the second rising on the 22nd, and
the slaughter of Foulon and Berthier--it was not until then, I say,
that the country round us began to be moved. Father Benit, with a
face of astonishment and doubt, brought me the tidings, and we walked
on the terrace discussing it. Probably reports, containing more or
less of the truth, had reached the city before, and, giving men
something else to think of, had saved me from challenge or
molestation. But, in the country where I had spent the week in moody
unrest, and not unfrequently reversing in the morning the decision at
which I had arrived in the night, I had heard nothing until the Cur
came--I think on the morning of the 29th of July.

"And what do you think now?" I said thoughtfully, when I had listened
to his tale.

"Only what I did before," he answered stoutly. "It has come. Without
money, and therefore without soldiers who will fight, with a starving
people, with men's minds full of theories and abstractions, that all
tend towards change, what can a Government do?"


"Apparently it can cease to govern," I said tartly; "and that is not
what any one wants."

"There must be a period of unrest," he replied, but less confidently.
"The forces of order, however, the forces of the law have always
triumphed. I don't doubt that they will again."

"After a period of unrest?"

"Yes," he answered. "After a period of unrest. And, I confess, I wish
that we were through that. But we must be of good heart, M. le
Vicomte. We must trust the people; we must confide in their good
sense, their capacity for government, their moderation----"

I had to interrupt him. "What is it, Gil?" I said with a gesture of
apology. The servant had come out of the house and was waiting to
speak to me.

"M. Doury, M. le Vicomte, from Cahors," he answered.

"The inn-keeper?"

"Yes, Monsieur; and Buton. They ask to see you."

"Together?" I said. It seemed a strange conjunction.

"Yes, Monsieur."

"Well, show them here," answered, after consulting my companion's
face. "But Doury? I paid my bill. What can he want?"

"We shall see," Father Benit answered, his eyes on the door. "Here
they come. Ah! Now, M. le Vicomte," he continued in a lower tone, "I
feel less confident."

I suppose he guessed something akin to the truth; but for my part I
was completely at a loss. The innkeeper, a sleek, complaisant man, of
whom, though I had known him some years, I had never seen much beyond
the crown of his head, nor ever thought of him as apart from his
guests and his ordinary, wore, as he advanced, a strange motley of
dignity and subservience; now strutting with pursed lips, and an air
of extreme importance, and now stooping to bow in a shame-faced and
half-hearted manner. His costume was as great a surprise as his
appearance, for, instead of his citizen's suit of black, he sported a
blue coat with gold buttons, and a canary waistcoat, and he carried a
gold-headed cane; sober splendours, which, nevertheless, paled before
two large bunches of ribbons, white, red, and blue, which he wore, one
on his breast, and one in his hat.

His companion, who followed a foot or two behind, his giant frame and
sun-burned face setting off the citizen's plumpness, was similarly
bedizened. But though be-ribboned and in strange company, he was still
Baton, the smith. His face reddened as he met my eyes, and he shielded
himself as well as he could behind Doury's form.

"Good-morning, Doury," I said. I could have laughed at the awkward
complaisance of the man's manner, if something in the gravity of the
Cur's face had not restrained me. "What brings you to Saux?" I
continued. "And what can I do for you?"

"If it please you, M. le Vicomte," he began. Then he paused, and
straightening himself--for habit had bent his back--he continued
abruptly, "Public business, Monsieur, with you on it."

"With me?' I said, amazed. On public business?"

He smiled in a sickly way, but stuck to his text. "Even so, Monsieur,"
he said. "There are such great changes, and--and so great need of
advice."

"That I ought not to wonder at M. Doury seeking it at Saux?"

"Even so, Monsieur."

I did not try to hide my contempt and amusement; but shrugged my
shoulders, and looked at the Cur.

"Well," I said, after a moment of silence, "and what is it? Have you
been selling bad wine? Or do you want the number of courses limited by
Act of the States General? Or----"

"Monsieur," he said, drawing himself up with an attempt at dignity,
"this is no time for jesting. In the present crisis inn-keepers have
as much at stake as, with reverence, the noblesse; and deserted by
those who should lead them----"

"What, the inn-keepers?" I cried.

He grew as red as a beetroot. "M. le Vicomte understands that I mean
the people," he said stiffly. "Who deserted, I say, by their natural
leaders----"

"For instance?"

"M. le Duc d'Artois, M. le Prince de Cond, M. le Duc de Polignac,
M.----"

"Bah!" I said. "How have they deserted?"

"_Pardieu_, Monsieur! Have you not heard?"

"Have I not heard what?"

"That they have left France? That on the night of the 17th, three days
after the capture of the Bastille, the princes of the blood left
France by stealth, and----"

"Impossible!" I said. "Impossible! Why should they leave?"

"That is the very question, M. le Vicomte," he answered, with eager
forwardness, "that is being asked. Some say that they thought to
punish Paris by withdrawing from it. Some that they did it to show
their disapproval of his most gracious Majesty's amnesty, which was
announced on that day. Some that they stand in fear. Some even that
they anticipated Foulon's fate----"

"Fool!" I cried, stopping him sternly--for I found this too much for
my stomach--"you rave! Go back to your menus and your bouillis! What
do you know about State affairs? Why, in my grandfather's time," I
continued wrathfully, "if you had spoken of princes of the blood after
that fashion, you would have tasted bread and water for six months,
and been lucky had you got off unwhipped!"

He quailed before me, and forgetting his new part in old habits,
muttered an apology. He had not meant to give offence, he said. He had
not understood. Nevertheless, I was preparing to read him a lesson
when, to my astonishment, Buton intervened.

"But, Monsieur, that is thirty years back," he said doggedly.

"What, villain?" I exclaimed, almost breathless with astonishment,
"what do you in this _galre?_"

"I am with him," he answered, indicating his companion by a sullen
gesture.

"On State business?"

"Yes, Monsieur."

"Why, _mon Dieu_," I cried, staring at them between amusement and
incredulity, "if this is true, why did you not bring the watch-dog as
well! And Farmer Jean's ram? And the good-wife's cat? And M. Doury's
turnspit? And----"

M. le Cur touched my arm. "Perhaps you had better hear what they have
to say," he observed softly. "Afterwards, M. le Vicomte----"

I nodded sulkily. "What is it, then?" I said. "Ask what you want to
ask."

"The Intendant has fled," Doury answered, recovering something of his
lost dignity, "and we are forming, in pursuance of advice received
from Paris, and following the glorious example of that city, a
Committee; a Committee to administer the affairs of the district. From
that Committee, I, Monsieur, with my good friend here, have the honour
to be a deputation."

"With him?" I said, unable to control myself longer. "But, in heaven's
name, what has he to do with the Committee? Or the affairs of the
district?"

And I pointed with relentless finger at Buton, who reddened under his
tan, and moved his huge feet uneasily, but did not speak.

"He is a member of it," the inn-keeper answered, regarding his
colleague with a side glance, which seemed to express anything but
liking. "This Committee, to be as perfect as possible, Monsieur le
Vicomte will understand, must represent all classes."

"Even mine, I suppose," I said, with a sneer.

"It is on that business we have come," he answered awkwardly. "To ask,
in a word, M. le Vicomte, that you will allow yourself to be elected a
member, and not only a member----

"What elevation!"

"But President of the Committee."

After all--it was no more than I had been foreseeing! It had come
suddenly, but in the main it was only that in sober fact which I had
foreseen in a dream. Styled the mandate of the people, it had sounded
well; by the mouth of Doury, the inn-keeper, Buton assessor, it jarred
every nerve in me. I say, it should not have surprised me; while such
things were happening in the world, with a King who stood by and saw
his fortress taken, and his servants killed, and pardoned the rebels;
with an Intendant of Paris slaughtered in his own streets; with
rumours and riots in every province, and flying princes, and swinging
millers, there was really nothing wonderful in the invitation. And
now, looking back, I find nothing surprising in it. I have lived to
see men of the same trade as Doury, stand by the throne, glittering in
stars and orders; and a smith born in the forge sit down to dine with
Emperors. But that July day on the terrace at Saux, the offer seemed
of all farces the wildest, and of all impertinences the most absurd.

"Thanks, Monsieur," I said, at last, when I had sufficiently recovered
from my astonishment. "If I understand you rightly, you ask me to sit
on the same Committee with that man?" And I pointed grimly to Buton.
"With the peasant born on my land, and subject yesterday to my
justice? With the serf whom my fathers freed? With the workman living
on my wages?"

Doury glanced at his colleague. "Well, M. le Vicomte," he said, with a
cough, "to be perfect, you understand, a Committee must represent
all."

"A Committee!" I retorted, unable to repress my scorn. "It is a new
thing in France. And what is the perfect Committee to do?"

Doury on a sudden recovered himself, and swelled with importance. "The
Intendant has fled," he said, "and people no longer trust the
magistrates. There are rumours of brigands, too; and corn is required.
With all this the Committee must deal. It must take measures to keep
the peace, to supply the city, to satisfy the soldiers, to hold
meetings, and consider future steps. Besides, M. le Vicomte," he
continued, puffing out his cheeks, "it will correspond with Paris; it
will administer the law; it will----"

"In a word," I said quietly, "it will govern. The King, I suppose,
having abdicated."

Doury shrank bodily, and even lost some of his colour. "God forbid!"
he said, in a whining tone. "It will do all in his Majesty's name."

"And by his authority?"

The inn-keeper stared at me, startled and nonplussed; and muttered
something about the people.

"Ah!" I said. "It is the people who invite me to govern, then, is it?
With an inn-keeper and a peasant? And other inn-keepers and peasants,
I suppose? To govern! To usurp his Majesty's functions? To supersede
his magistrates; to bribe his forces? In a word, friend Doury," I
continued suavely, "to commit treason. Treason, you understand?"

The inn-keeper did; and he wiped his forehead with a shaking hand, and
stood, scared and speechless, looking at me piteously. A second time
the blacksmith took it on himself to answer.

"Monseigneur," he muttered, drawing his great black hand across his
beard.

"Buton," I answered suavely, "permit me. For a man who aspires to
govern the country, you are too respectful."

"You have omitted one thing it is for the Committee to do," the smith
answered hoarsely, looking--like a timid, yet sullen, dog--anywhere
but in my face.

"And that is?"

"To protect the Seigneurs."

I stared at him, between anger and surprise. This was a new light.
After a pause, "From whom?" I said curtly.

"Their people," he answered.

"Their Butons," I said. "I see. We are to be burned in our beds, are
we?"

He stood sulkily silent.

"Thank you, Buton," I said. "And that is your return for a winter's
corn. Thanks! In this world it is profitable to do good!"

The man reddened through his tan, and on a sudden looked at me for the
first time. "You know that you lie, M. le Vicomte!" he said.

"Lie, sirrah?" I cried.

"Yes, Monsieur," he answered. "You know that I would die for the
seigneur, as much as if the iron collar were round my neck! That
before fire touched the house of Saux it should burn me! That I am my
lord's man, alive and dead. But, Monseigneur," and, as he continued,
he lowered his tone to one of earnestness, striking in a man so rough,
"there are abuses, and there must be an end of them. There are
tyrants, and they must go. There are men and women and children
starving, and there must be an end of that. There is grinding of the
faces of the poor, Monseigneur--not here, but everywhere round us--and
there must be an end of that. And the poor pay taxes and the rich go
free; the poor make the roads, and the rich use them; the poor have no
salt, while the King eats gold. To all these things there is now to be
an end--quietly, if the seigneurs will--but an end. An end,
Monseigneur, though we burn chteaux," he added grimly.




                             CHAPTER VI.

                        A MEETING IN THE ROAD.


The unlooked-for eloquence which rang in the blacksmith's words, and
the assurance of his tone, no less than this startling disclosure of
thoughts with which I had never dreamed of crediting him, or any
peasant, took me so aback for a moment that I stood silent. Doury
seized the occasion, and struck in.

"You see now, M. le Vicomte," he said complacently, "the necessity for
such a Committee. The King's peace must be maintained."

"I see," I answered harshly, "that there are violent men abroad, who
were better in the stocks. Committee? Let the King's officers keep the
King's peace! The proper machinery----"

"It is shattered!"

The words were Doury's. The next moment he quailed at his presumption.
"Then let it be repaired!" I thundered. "_Mon Dieu!_ that a set of
tavern cooks and base-born rascals should go about the country prating
of it, and prating to me! Go, I will have nothing to do with you or
your Committee. Go, I say!"

"Nevertheless--a little patience, M. le Vicomte," he persisted,
chagrin on his pale face--"nevertheless, if any of the nobility would
give us countenance, you most of all----"

"There would then be some one to hang instead of Doury!" I answered
bluntly. "Some one behind whom he could shield himself, and lesser
villains hide. But I will not be the stalking-horse."

"And yet, in other provinces," he answered desperately, his
disappointment more and more pronounced, "M. de Liancourt and M. de
Rochefoucauld have not disdained to----"

"Nevertheless, I disdain!" I retorted. "And more, I tell you, and I
bid you remember it, you will have to answer for the work you are
doing. I have told you it is treason. It is treason; I will have
neither act nor part in it. Now go."

"There will be burning," the smith muttered.

"Begone!" I said sternly. "If you do not----"

"Before the morn is old the sky will be red," he answered. "On your
head, Seigneur, be it!"

I aimed a blow at him with my cane; but he avoided it with a kind of
dignity, and stalked away, Doury following him with a pale, hang-dog
face, and his finery sitting very ill upon him. I stood and watched
them go, and then I turned to the Cur to hear what he had to say.

But I found him gone also. He, too, had slipped away; through the
house, to intercept them at the gates, perhaps, and dissuade them. I
waited for him, querulously tapping the walk with my stick, and
watching the corner of the house. Presently he came round it, holding
his hat an inch or two above his head, his lean, tall figure almost
shadowless, for it was noon. I noticed that his lips moved as he came
towards me; but, when I spoke, he looked up cheerfully.

"Yes," he said in answer to my question, "I went through the house,
and stopped them."

"It would be useless," I said. "Men so mad as to think that they could
replace his Majesty's Government with a Committee of smiths and
pastrycooks----"

"I have joined it," he answered, smiling faintly.

"The Committee?" I ejaculated, breathless with surprise.

"Even so."

"Impossible!"

"Why?" he said quietly. "Have I not always predicted this day? Is not
this what Rousseau, with his _Social Contract_, and Beaumarchais, with
his 'Figaro,' and every philosopher who ever repeated the one, and
every fine lady who ever applauded the other, have been teaching?
Well, it has come, and I have advised you, M. le Vicomte, to stand by
your order. But I, a poor man, I stand by mine. And for the Committee
of what seems to you, my friend, impossible people, is not any kind
of government"--this more warmly, and as if he were arguing with
himself--"better than none? Understand, Monsieur, the old machinery
has broken down. The Intendant has fled. The people defy the
magistrates. The soldiers side with the people. The _huissiers_ and
tax collectors are--the Good God knows where!"

"Then," I said indignantly, "it is time for the gentry to----"

"Take the lead and govern?" he rejoined. "By whom? A handful of
servants and game-keepers? Against the people? against such a mob as
you saw in the Square at Cahors? Impossible, Monsieur."

"But the world seems to be turning upside down," I said helplessly.

"The greater need of a strong unchanging holdfast--not of the world,"
he answered reverently; and he lifted his hat a moment from his head
and stood in thought. Then he continued: "However, the matter is this.
I hear from Doury that the gentry are gathering at Cahors, with the
view of combining, as you suggest, and checking the people. Now, it
must be useless, and it may be worse. It may lead to the very excesses
they would prevent."

"In Cahors?"

"No, in the country. Buton, be sure, did not speak without warrant. He
is a good man, but he knows some who are not, and there are lonely
chteaux in Quercy, and dainty women who have never known the touch of
a rough hand, and--and children."

"But," I cried aghast, "do you fear a Jacquerie?"

"God knows," he answered solemnly. "The fathers have eaten sour
grapes, and the children's teeth are set on edge. How many years have
men spent at Versailles the peasant's blood, life, bone, flesh! To pay
back at last, it may be, of their own! But God forbid, Monsieur, God
forbid. Yet, if ever--it comes now."

                          *   *   *   *   *

When he was gone I could not rest. His words had raised a fever in me.
What might not be afoot, what might not be going on, while I lay idle?
And, presently, to quench my thirst for news, I mounted and rode out
on the way to Cahors. The day was hot, the time for riding ill-chosen;
but the exercise did me good. I began to recover from the giddiness of
thought into which the Cur's fears, coming on the top of Buton's
warning, had thrown me. For a while I had seen things with their eyes;
I had allowed myself to be carried away by their imaginations; and the
prospect of a France ruled by a set of farriers and postillions had
not seemed so bizarre as it began to look, now that I had time,
mounting the long hill, which lies one league from Saux and two from
Cahors, to consider it calmly. For a moment, the wild idea of a whole
gentry fleeing like hares before their peasantry, had not seemed so
very wild.

Now, on reflection, beginning to see things in their normal sizes, I
called myself a simpleton. A Jacquerie? Three centuries and more had
passed since France had known the thing in the dark ages. Could any,
save a child alone in the night, or a romantic maiden solitary in
her rock castle, dream of its recurrence? True, as I skirted St.
Alais, which lies a little aside from the road, at the foot of the
hill, I saw at the village-turning a sullen group of faces that
should have been bent over the hoe; a group, gloomy, discontented,
waiting--waiting, with shock heads and eyes glittering under low
brows, for God knows what. But I had seen such a gathering before; in
bad times, when seed was lacking, or when despair, or some excessive
outrage on the part of the _fermier_, had driven the peasants to fold
their hands and quit the fields. And always it had ended in nothing,
or a hanging at most. Why should I suppose that anything would come of
it now, or that a spark in Paris must kindle a fire here?

In fact, I as good as made up my mind; and laughed at my simplicity.
The Cur had let his predictions run away with him, and Buton's
ignorance and credulity had done the rest. What, I now saw, could be
more absurd than to suppose that France, the first, the most stable,
the most highly civilised of States, wherein for two centuries none
had resisted the royal power and stood, could become in a moment the
theatre of barbarous excesses? What more absurd than to conceive it
turned into the _Petit Trianon_ of a gang of _rturiers_ and
_canaille?_

At this point in my thoughts I broke off, for, as I reached it, a
coach came slowly over the ridge before me and began to descend the
road. For a space it hung clear-cut against the sky, the burly figure
of the coachman and the heads of the two lackeys who swung behind it
visible above the hood. Then it began to drop down cautiously towards
me. The men behind sprang down and locked the wheels, and the
lumbering vehicle slid and groaned downwards, the wheelers pressing
back, the leading horses tossing their heads impatiently. The road
there descends not in _lacets_, but straight, for nearly half a mile
between poplars; and on the summer air the screaming of the wheels and
the jingling of the harness came distinctly to the ear.

Presently I made out that the coach was Madame St. Alais'; and I felt
inclined to turn and avoid it. But the next moment pride came to my
aid, and I shook my reins and went on to meet it.

I had scarcely seen a person except Father Benit since the affair at
Cahors, and my cheek flamed at the thought of the _rencontre_ before
me. For the same reason the coach seemed to come on very slowly; but
at last I came abreast of it, passed the straining horses, and looked
into the carriage with my hat in my hand, fearing that I might see
Madame, hoping I might see Louis, ready with a formal salute at least.
Politeness required no less.

But sitting in the place of honour, instead of M. le Marquis, or his
mother, or M. le Comte, was one little figure throned in the middle of
the seat; a little figure with a pale inquiring face that blushed
scarlet at sight of me, and eyes that opened wide with fright, and
lips that trembled piteously. It was Mademoiselle!

Had I known a moment earlier that she was in the carriage and alone, I
should have passed by in silence; as was doubtless my duty after what
had happened. I was the last person who should have intruded on her.
But the men, grinning, I dare say, at the encounter--for probably
Madame's treatment of me was the talk of the house--had drawn up, and
I had reined up instinctively; so that before I quite understood that
she was alone, save for two maids who sat with their backs to the
horses, we were gazing at one another--like two fools!

"Mademoiselle!" I said.

"Monsieur!" she answered mechanically.

Now, when I had said that, I had said all that I had a right to say. I
should have saluted, and gone on with that. But something impelled me
to add--"Mademoiselle is going--to St. Alais?"

Her lips moved, but I heard no sound. She stared at me like one under
a spell. The elder of her women, however, answered for her, and said
briskly:----

"Ah, _oui_, Monsieur."

"And Madame de St. Alais?"

"Madame remains at Cahors," the woman answered in the same tone, "with
M. le Marquis, who has business."

Then, at any rate, I should have gone on; but the girl sat looking at
me, silent and blushing; and something in the picture, something in
the thought of her arriving alone and unprotected at St. Alais, taken
with a memory of the lowering faces I had seen in the village,
impelled me to stand and linger; and finally to blurt out what I had
in my mind.

"Mademoiselle," I said impulsively, ignoring her attendants, "if you
will take my advice--you will not go on."

One of the women muttered "_Ma foi!_" under her breath. The other said
"Indeed!" and tossed her head impertinently. But Mademoiselle found
her voice.

"Why, Monsieur?" she said clearly and sweetly, her eyes wide with a
surprise that for the moment overcame her shyness.

"Because," I answered diffidently--I repented already that I had
spoken--"the state of the country is such--I mean that Madame la
Marquise scarcely understands perhaps that--that----"

"What, Monsieur?" Mademoiselle asked primly.

"That at St. Alais," I stammered, "there is a good deal of discontent,
Mademoiselle, and----"

"At St. Alais?" she said.

"In the neighbourhood, I should have said," I answered awkwardly.
"And--and in fine," I continued very much embarrassed, "it would be
better, in my poor opinion, for Mademoiselle to turn and----"

"Accompany Monsieur, perhaps?" one of the women said; and she giggled
insolently.

Mademoiselle St. Alais flashed a look at the offender, that made me
wink. Then with her cheeks burning, she said:----

"Drive on!"

I was foolish and would not let ill alone. "But, Mademoiselle," I
said, "a thousand pardons, but----"

"Drive on!" she repeated; this time in a tone, which, though it was
still sweet and clear, was not to be gainsaid. The maid who had not
offended--the other looked no little scared--repeated the order, the
coach began to move, and in a moment I was left in the road, sitting
on my horse with my hat in my hand, and looking foolishly at nothing.

The straight road running down between lines of poplars, the
descending coach, lurching and jolting as it went, the faces of the
grinning lackeys as they looked back at me through the dust--I well
remember them all. They form a picture strangely vivid and distinct in
that gallery where so many more important have faded into nothingness.
I was hot, angry, vexed with myself; conscious that I had trespassed
beyond the becoming, and that I more than deserved the repulse I had
suffered. But through all ran a thread of a new feeling--a quite new
feeling. Mademoiselle's face moved before my eyes--showing through the
dust; her eyes full of dainty surprise, or disdain as delicate,
accompanied me as I rode. I thought of her, not of Buton or Doury, the
Committee or the Cur, the heat or the dull road. I ceased to
speculate except on the chances of a peasant rising. That, that alone
assumed a new and more formidable aspect; and became in a moment
imminent and probable. The sight of Mademoiselle's childish face had
given a reality to Buton's warnings, which all the Cur's hints had
failed to impart to them.

So much did the thought now harass me, that to escape it I shook up my
horse, and cantered on, Gil and Andr following, and wondering,
doubtless, why I did not turn. But, wholly taken up with the horrid
visions which the blacksmith's words had called up, I took no heed of
time until I awoke to find myself more than half-way on the road to
Cahors, which lies three leagues and a mile from Saux. Then I drew
rein and stood in the road, in a fit of excitement and indecision.
Within the half-hour I might be at Madame St. Alais' door in Cahors,
and, whatever happened then, I should have no need to reproach myself.
Or in a little more I might be at home, ingloriously safe.

Which was it to be? The moment, though I did not know it, was fateful.
On the one hand, Mademoiselle's face, her beauty, her innocence, her
helplessness, pleaded with me strangely, and dragged me on to give the
warning. On the other, my pride urged me to return, and avoid such a
reception as I had every reason to expect.

In the end I went on. In less than half an hour I had crossed the
Valaridr bridge.

Yet it must not be supposed that I decided without doubt, or went
forward without misgiving. The taunts and sneers to which Madame had
treated me were too recent for that; and a dozen times pride and
resentment almost checked my steps, and I turned and went home again.
On each occasion, however, the ugly faces and brutish eyes I had seen
in the village rose before me; I remembered the hatred in which
Gargouf, the St. Alais' steward, was held; I pictured the horrors that
might be enacted before help could come from Cahors; and I went on.

Yet with a mind made up to ridicule; which even the crowded streets,
when I reached them, failed to relieve, though they wore an
unmistakable air of excitement. Groups of people, busily conversing,
were everywhere to be seen; and in two or three places men were
standing on stools--in a fashion then new to me--haranguing knots of
idlers. Some of the shops were shut, there were guards before others,
and before the bakehouses. I remarked a great number of journals and
pamphlets in men's hands, and that where these were, the talk rose
loudest. In some places, too, my appearance seemed to create
excitement, but this was of a doubtful character, a few greeting me
respectfully, while more stared at me in silence. Several asked me, as
I passed, if I brought news, and seemed disappointed when I said I did
not; and at two points a handful of people hooted me.

This angered me a little, but I forgot it in a thing still more
surprising. Presently, as I rode, I heard my name called; and turning,
found M. de Gontaut hurrying after me as fast as his dignity and
lameness would permit. He leaned, as usual, on the arm of a servant,
his other hand holding a cane and snuff-box; and two stout fellows
followed him. I had no reason to suppose that he would appreciate the
service I had done him more highly, or acknowledge it more gratefully,
than on the day of the riot; and my surprise was great when he came
up, his face all smiles.

"Nothing, for months, has given me so much pleasure as this," he said,
saluting me with overwhelming cordiality. "By my faith, M. le Vicomte,
you have outdone us all! You will have such a reception yonder! and
you have brought two good knaves, I see. It is not fair," he
continued, nodding his head with senile jocularity. "I declare it is
not fair. But you know the text? 'There is more joy in heaven over one
sinner that repenteth than----' Ha! ha! Well, we must not be jealous.
You have taught them a lesson; and now we are united."

"But, M. le Baron," I said in amazement, as, obeying his gesture, I
moved on, while he limped jauntily beside me, "I do not understand you
in the least!"

"You don't?"

"No!" I said.

"Ah! you did not think that we should hear it so soon," he replied,
shaking his head sagely. "Oh, I can tell you we are well provided. The
campaign has begun, and the information department has not been
neglected. Little escapes us, and we shall soon set these rogues
right. But, for the fact, that damned rascal Doury let it out. I hear
you told them some fine home-truths. A Committee, the insolents! And
in our teeth! But you gave them a sharp set-back, I hear, M. le
Vicomte. If you had joined it, now----"

He stopped abruptly. A man crossing the street had slightly jostled
him. The old noble lost his temper, and on the instant raised his
stick with a passionate oath, and the man cowered away begging his
pardon. But M. de Gontaut was not to be appeased.

"Vagabond!" he cried after him, in a voice trembling with rage, "you
would throw me down again, would you? We will put you in your place
by-and-by. We will; why, _Dieu!_ when I was young----"

"But, M. le Baron," I said to divert his attention, for two or three
bystanders were casting ugly looks at us, and I saw that it needed
little to bring about a fracas, "are you quite sure that we shall be
able to keep them in check?"

The old noble still trembled, but he drew himself up with a gesture of
pathetic gallantry.

"You shall see!" he cried. "When it comes to hard knocks, you shall
see, Monsieur. But here we are; and there is Madame St. Alais on the
balcony with some of her bodyguard." He paused to kiss his hand, with
the air of a Polignac. "Up there, M. le Vicomte, you will see what you
will see," he continued. "And I--I shall be in luck, too, for I have
brought you."

It seemed to me more like a dream than a reality. A fortnight before,
I had been spurned from this house with insults; I had been bidden
never to enter it again. Now, on the balconies, from which pretty
faces and powdered heads looked down, handkerchiefs fluttered to greet
me. On the stairs, which, crowded with servants and lackeys, shook
under the constant stream of comers and goers, I was received with a
hum of applause. In every corner snuff-boxes were being tapped and
canes handled; the flashing of roguish eyes behind fans vied with the
glitter of mirrors. And through all a lane was made for me. At the
door Louis met me. A little farther on, Madame came half-way across
the room to me. It was a triumph--a triumph which I found
inexplicable, unintelligible, until I learned that the rebuff which I
had administered to the deputation had been exaggerated a dozen times,
nay, a hundred times, until it met even the wishes of the most
violent; while the sober and thoughtful were too glad to hail in my
adhesion the proof of that reaction, which the Royalist party, from
the first day of the troubles, never ceased to expect.

No wonder that, taken by surprise and intoxicated with incense, I let
myself go. To have declared in that company and with Madame's gracious
words in my ears, that I had not come to join them, that I had come on
a different errand altogether, that though I had repelled the
deputation I had no intention of acting against it, would have
required a courage and a hardness I could not boast; while the
circumstances of the deputation, Doury's presumption and Buton's
hints, to say nothing of the violence of the Parisian mob, had not
failed to impress me unfavourably. With a thousand others who had
prepared themselves to welcome reform, I recoiled when I saw the
lengths to which it was tending; and, though nothing had been farther
from my mind when I entered Cahors than to join myself to the St.
Alais faction, I found it impossible to reject their apologies on the
spot, or explain on the instant the real purpose with which I had come
to them.

I was, in fact, the sport of circumstances; weak, it will be said, in
the wrong place and stubborn in the wrong; betraying a boy's petulance
at one time, and a boy's fickleness at another; and now a tool and now
a churl. Perhaps truly. But it was a time of trial; nor was I the only
man or the oldest man who, in those days, changed his opinions, and
again within the week went back; or who found it hard to find a
cockade, white, black, red or tricolour, to his taste.

Besides, flattery is sweet, and I was young; moreover, I had
Mademoiselle in my head and nothing could exceed Madame's
graciousness. I think she valued me the more for my late revolt, and
prided herself on my reduction in proportion as I had shown myself
able to resist.

"Few words are better, M. le Vicomte," she said, with a dignity which
honoured me equally with herself. "Many things have happened since I
saw you. We are neither of us quite of the same opinion. Forgive me. A
woman's word and a man's sword do no dishonour."

I bowed, blushing with pleasure. After a fortnight spent in solitude
these moving groups, bowing, smiling, talking in low, earnest tones of
the one purpose, the one aim, had immense influence with me. I felt
the contagion. I let Madame take me into her confidence.

"The King"--it was always the King with her--"in a week or two the
King will assert himself. As yet his ear has been abused. It will
pass; in the meantime we must take our proper places. We must arm our
servants and keepers, repress disorder and resist encroachment."

"And the Committee, Madame?"

She tapped me, smiling, with the ends of her dainty fingers.

"We will treat it as you treated it," she said.

"You think that you will be strong enough?"

"We," she answered.

"We?" I said, correcting myself with a blush.

"Why not? How can it be otherwise?" she replied, looking proudly round
her. "Can you look round and doubt it, M. le Vicomte?"

"But France?" I said.

"We are France," she retorted with a superb gesture.

And certainly the splendid crowd that filled her rooms was almost
warrant for the words; a crowd of stately men and fair women such as I
have only seen once or twice since those days. Under the surface there
may have been pettiness and senility; the exhaustion of vice; jealousy
and lukewarmness and dissension; but the powder and patches, the silks
and velvets of the old _rgime_, gave to all a semblance of strength,
and at least the appearance of dignity. If few were soldiers, all wore
swords and could use them. The fact that the small sword, so powerful
a weapon in the duel, is useless against a crowd armed with stones and
clubs had not yet been made clear. Nothing seemed more easy than for
two or three hundred swordsmen to rule a province.

At any rate I found nothing but what was feasible in the notion; and
with little real reluctance, if no great enthusiasm, I pinned on the
white cockade. Putting all thoughts of present reform from my mind, I
agreed that order--order was the one pressing need of the country.

On that all were agreed, and all were hopeful. I heard no misgivings,
but a good deal of vapouring, in which poor M. de Gontaut, with the
palsy almost upon him, had his part. No one dropped a hint of danger
in the country, or of a revolt of the peasants. Even to me, as I stood
in the brilliant crowd, the danger grew to seem so remote and unreal,
that, delicacy as well as the fear of ridicule, kept me silent. I
could not speak of Mademoiselle without awkwardness, and so the
warning which I had come to give died on my lips. I saw that I should
be laughed at, I fancied myself deceived, and I was silent.

It was only when, after promising to return next day, I stood at the
door prepared to leave, and found myself alone with Louis, that I let
a word fall. Then I asked him with a little hesitation if he thought
that his sister was quite safe at St. Alais.

"Why not?" he said easily, with his hand on my shoulder.

"The 'trouble is not in the town only," I hinted. "Nor perhaps the
worst of the trouble."

He shrugged his shoulders. "You think too much of it, _mon cher_," he
answered. "Believe me, now that we are at one the trouble is over."

And that was the evening of the 4th of August, the day on which the
Assembly in Paris renounced at a single sitting all immunities,
exemptions, and privileges, all feudal dues, and fines, and rights,
all tolls, all tithes, the salt tax, the game laws, _capitaineries!_
At one sitting, on that evening; and Louis thought that the trouble
was over!




                             CHAPTER VII.

                              THE ALARM.


At that time, a brazier in the market-place, and three or four
lanterns at street crossings, made up the most of the public lighting.
When I paused, therefore, to breathe my horse on the brow of the
slope, beyond the Valandr bridge, and looked back on Cahors, I saw
only darkness, broken here and there by a blur of yellow light; that
still, by throwing up a fragment of wall or eaves, told in a
mysterious way of the sleeping city.

The river, a faint, shimmering line, conjectured rather than seen,
wound round all. Above, clouds were flying across the sky, and a wind,
cold for the time of year--cold, at least, after the heat of the
day--chilled the blood, and slowly filled the mind with the solemnity
of night.

As I stood listening to the breathing of the horses, the excitement in
which I had passed the last few hours died away, and left me
wondering--wondering, and a little regretful. The exaltation gone, I
found the scene I had just left flavourless; I even presently began to
find it worse. Some false note in the cynical, boastful voices and the
selfish--the utterly selfish--plans, to which I had been listening for
hours, made itself heard in the stillness. Madame's "We are France,"
which had sounded well amid the lights and glitter of the _salon_,
among laces and _fripons_ and rose-pink coats, seemed folly in the
face of the infinite night, behind which lay twenty-five millions of
Frenchmen.

However, what I had done, I had done. I had the white cockade on my
breast; I was pledged to order--and to my order. And it might be the
better course. But, with reflection, enthusiasm faded; and, by some
strange process, as it faded, and the scene in which I had just taken
part lost its hold, the errand that had brought me to Cahors recovered
importance. As Madame St. Alais' influence grew weak, the memory of
Mademoiselle, sitting lonely and scared in her coach, grew vivid,
until I turned my horse fretfully, and endeavoured to lose the thought
in rapid movement.

But it is not so easy to escape from oneself at night, as in the day.
The soughing of the wind through the chestnut trees, the drifting
clouds, and the sharp ring of hoofs on the road, all laid as it were a
solemn finger on the pulses and stilled them. The men behind me talked
in sleepy voices, or rode silently. The town lay a hundred leagues
behind. Not a light appeared on the upland. In the world of night
through which we rode, a world of black, mysterious bulks rising
suddenly against the grey sky, and as suddenly sinking, we were the
only inhabitants.

At last we reached the hill above St. Alais, and I looked eagerly for
lights in the valley; forgetting that, as it wanted only an hour of
midnight, the village would have retired hours before. The
disappointment, and the delay--for the steepness of the hill forbade
any but a walking pace--fretted me; and when I heard, a moment later,
a certain noise behind me, a noise I knew only too well, I flared up.

"Stay, fool!" I cried, reining in my horse, and turning in the saddle.
"That mare has broken her shoe again, and you are riding on as if
nothing were the matter! Get down--and see. Do you think that I----"

"Pardon, Monsieur," Gil muttered. He had been sleeping in his saddle.

He scrambled down. The mare he rode, a valuable one, had a knack of
breaking her hind shoe; after which she never failed to lame herself
at the first opportunity. Buton had tried every method of shoeing, but
without success.

I sprang to the ground while he lifted the foot. My ear had not
deceived me; the shoe was broken. Gil tried to remove the jagged
fragment left on the hoof, but the mare was restive, and he had to
desist.

"She cannot go to Saux in that state," I said angrily.

The men were silent for a moment, peering at the mare. Then Gil spoke.

"The St. Alais forge is not three hundred yards down the lane,
Monsieur," he said. "And the turn is yonder. We could knock up Petit
Jean, and get him to bring his pincers here. Only----"

"Only what?" I said peevishly.

"I quarrelled with him at Cahors Fair, Monsieur," Gil answered
sheepishly; "and he might not come for us."

"Very well," I said gruffly, "I will go. And do you stay here, and
keep the mare quiet."

Andr held the stirrup for me to mount. The smithy, the first hovel in
the village, was a quarter of a mile away, and, in reason, I should
have ridden to it. But, in my irritation, I was ready to do anything
they did not propose, and, roughly rejecting his help, I started on
foot. Fifty paces brought me to the branch road that led to St. Alais,
and, making out the turning with a little difficulty, I plunged into
it; losing, in a moment, the cheerful sound of jingling bits and the
murmur of the men's voices.

Poplars rose on high banks on either side of the lane, and made the
place as dark as a pit, and I had almost to grope my way. A stumble
added to my irritation, and I cursed the St. Alais for the ruts, and
the moon for its untimely setting. The ceaseless whispering of the
poplar leaves went with me, and, in some unaccountable way, annoyed
me. I stumbled again, and swore at Gil, and then stopped to listen. I
was in the road, and yet I heard the jingling of bits again, as if the
horses were following me.

I stopped angrily to listen, thinking that the men had disobeyed my
orders. Then I found that the sound came from the front, and was
heavier and harder than the ringing of bit or bridle. I groped my way
forward, wondering somewhat, until a faint, ruddy light, shining on
the darkness and the poplars, prepared me for the truth--welcome,
though it seemed of the strangest--that the forge was at work.

As I took this in, I turned a corner, and came within sight of the
smithy; and stood in astonishment. The forge was in full blast. Two
hammers were at work; I could see them rising and falling, and hear,
though they seemed to be muffled, the rhythmical jarring clang as they
struck the metal. The ruddy glare of the fire flooded the road and
burnished the opposite trees, and flung long, black shadows on the
sky.

Such a sight filled me with the utmost astonishment, for it was nearly
midnight. Fortunately something else I saw astonished me still more,
and stayed my foot. Between the point where I stood by the hedge and
the forge a number of men were moving, and flitting to and fro; men
with bare arms and matted heads, half-naked, with skins burned black.
It would have been hard to count them, they shifted so quickly; and I
did not try. It was enough for me that one half of them carried pikes
and pitchforks, that one man seemed to be detailing them into groups,
and giving them directions; and that, notwithstanding the occasional
jar of the hammers, an air of ferocious stealth marked their
movements.

For a moment I stood rooted to the spot. Then, instinctively, I
stepped aside into the shadow of the hedge, and looked again. The man
who acted as the leader carried an axe on his shoulder, the broad
blade of which, as it caught the glow of the furnace, seemed to be
bathed in blood. He was never still--this man. One moment he moved
from group to group, gesticulating, ordering, encouraging. Now he
pulled a man out of one troop and thrust him forcibly into another;
now he made a little speech, which was dumb play to me, a hundred
paces away; now he went into the forge, and his huge bulk for a moment
intercepted the light. It was Petit Jean, the smith.

I made use of the momentary darkness which he caused on one of these
occasions, and stole a little nearer. For I knew now what was before
me. I knew perfectly that all this meant blood, fire, outrage, flames
rising to heaven, screams startling the stricken night! But I must
know more, if I would do anything. I went nearer therefore, creeping
along the hedge, and crouching in the ditch, until no more than twelve
yards separated me from the muster. Then I stood still, as Petit Jean
came out again, to distribute another bundle of weapons, clutched
instantly and eagerly by grimy hands. I could hear now, and I
shuddered at what I heard. Gargouf was in every mouth. Gargouf, the
St. Alais' steward, coupled with grisly tortures and slow deaths, with
old sins, and outrages, and tyrannies, now for the first time voiced,
now to be expiated!

At last, one man laid the torch by crying aloud, "To the Chteau! To
the Chteau!" and in an instant the words changed the feelings with
which I had hitherto stared into immediate horror. I started forward.
My impulse, for a moment, was to step into the light and confront
them--to persuade, menace, cajole, turn them any way from their
purpose. But, in the same moment, reflection showed me the
hopelessness of the attempt. These were no longer peasants, dull,
patient clods, such as I had known all my life; but maddened beasts; I
read it in their gestures and the growl of their voices. To step
forward would be only to sacrifice myself; and with this thought I
crept back, gained the deeper shadow, and, turning on my heel, sped
down the lane. The ruts and the darkness were no longer anything to
me. If I stumbled, I did not notice it. If I fell, it was no matter.
In less than a minute I was standing, breathless, by the astonished
servants, striving to tell them quickly what they must do.

"The village is rising!" I panted. "They are going to burn the
Chteau, and Mademoiselle is in it! Gil, ride, gallop, lose not a
minute, to Cahors, and tell M. le Marquis. He must bring what forces
he can. And do you, Andr, go to Saux. Tell Father Benit. Bid him do
his utmost--bring all he can."

For answer, they stared, open-mouthed, through the dusk. "And the
mare, Monsieur?" one asked at last dully.

"Fool! let her go!" I cried. "The mare? Do you understand? The Chteau
is----"

"And you, Monsieur?"

"I am going to the house by the garden wing. Now go! Go, men!" I
continued'. "A hundred livres to each of you if the house is saved!"

I said the house because I dared not speak what was really in my mind;
because I dared not picture the girl, young, helpless, a woman, in the
hands of those monsters. Yet it was that which goaded me now, it was
that which gave me such strength that, before the men had ridden many
yards, I had forced my way through the thick fence, as if it had been
a mass of cobwebs. Once on the other side, in the open, I hastened
across one field and a second, skirted the village, and made for the
gardens which abutted on the east wing of the Chteau. I knew these
well; the part farthest from the house, and most easy of entrance, was
a wilderness, in which I had often played as a child. There was no
fence round this, except a wooden paling, and none between it and the
more orderly portion; while a side door opened from the latter into a
passage leading to the great hall of the Chteau. The house, a long,
regular building, reared by the Marquis's father, was composed of two
wings and a main block. All faced the end of the village street at a
distance of a hundred paces; a wide, dusty, ill-planted avenue leading
from the iron gates, which stood always open, to the state entrance.

The rioters had only a short distance to go, therefore, and no
obstacle between them and the house; none when they reached it of
greater consequence than ordinary doors and shutters, should the
latter be closed. As I ran, I shuddered to think how defenceless all
lay; and how quickly the wretches, bursting in the doors, would
overrun the shining parquets, and sweep up the spacious staircase.

The thought added wings to my feet. I had farther to go than they had,
and over hedges, but before the first sounds of their approach reached
the house I was already in the wilderness, and forcing my way through
it, stumbling over stumps and bushes, falling more than once, covered
with dust and sweat, but still pushing on.

At last I sprang into the open garden, with its shadowy walks, and
nymphs, and fauns; and looked towards the village. A dull red light
was beginning to show among the trunks of the avenue; a murmur of
voices sounded in the distance. They were coming! I wasted no more
than a single glance; then I ran down the walk, between the statues.
In a moment I passed into the darker shadow under the house, I was at
the door. I thrust my shoulder against it. It resisted; it resisted!
and every moment was precious. I could no longer see the approaching
lights nor hear the voices of the crowd--the angle of the house
intervened; but I could imagine only too vividly how they were coming
on; I fancied them already at the great door.

I hammered on the panels with my fist; then I fumbled for the latch,
and found it. It rose, but the door held. I shook it. I shook it again
in a frenzy; at last, forgetting caution, I shouted--shouted more
loudly. Then, after an age, as it seemed to me, standing panting in
the darkness, I heard halting footsteps come along the passage, and
saw a line of light grow, and brighten under the door. At last a
quavering voice asked:----

"Who is it?"

"M. de Saux," I answered impatiently. "M. de Saux! Let me in. Let me
in, do you hear?" And I struck the panels wrathfully.

"Monsieur," the voice answered, quavering more and more, "is there
anything the matter?"

"Matter? They are going to burn the house, fool!" I cried. "Open!
open! if you do not wish to be burned in your beds!"

For a moment I fancied that the man still hesitated. Then he unbarred.
In a twinkling I was inside, in a narrow passage, with dingy, stained
walls. An old man, lean-jawed and feeble, an old valet whom I had
often seen at worsted work in the ante-room, confronted me, holding an
iron candlestick. The light shook in his hands, and his jaw fell as he
looked at me. I saw that I had nothing to expect from him, and I
snatched the bar from his hands, and set it back in its place myself.
Then I seized the light.

"Quick!" I said passionately. "To your mistress."

"Monsieur?"

"Upstairs! Upstairs!"

He had more to say, but I did not wait to hear it. Knowing the way,
and having the candle, I left him, and hurried along the passage.
Stumbling over three or four mattresses that lay on the floor,
doubtless for the servants, I reached the hall. Here my taper shone a
mere speck in a cavern of blackness; but it gave me light enough to
see that the door was barred, and I turned to the staircase. As I set
my foot on the lowest step the old valet, who was following me as
fast as his trembling legs would carry him, blundered against a
spinning-wheel that stood in the hall. It fell with a clatter, and in
a moment a chorus of screams and cries broke out above. I sprang
up the stairs three at a stride, and on the lobby came on the
screamers--a terrified group, whose alarm the doubtful light of a
tallow candle, that stood beside them on the floor, could not
exaggerate. Nearest to me stood an old footman and a boy--their
terror-stricken eyes met mine as I mounted the last stairs. Behind
them, and crouching against a tapestry-covered seat that ran along the
wall, were the rest; three or four women, who shrieked and hid their
faces in one another's garments. They did not look up or take any heed
of me; but continued to scream steadily.

The old man with a quavering oath tried to still them.

"Where is Gargouf?" I asked him.

"He has gone to fasten the back doors, Monsieur," he answered.

"And Mademoiselle?"

"She is yonder."

He turned as he spoke; and I saw behind him a heavy curtain hiding the
oriel window of the lobby. It moved while I looked, and Mademoiselle
emerged from its folds, her small, childish face pale, but strangely
composed. She wore a light, loose robe, hastily arranged, and had her
hair hanging free at her back. In the gloom and confusion, which the
feeble candles did little to disperse, she did not at first see me.

"Has Gargouf come back?" she asked.

"No, Mademoiselle, but----"

The man was going to point me out; she interrupted him with a sharp
cry of anger.

"Stop these fools," she said. "Oh, stop these fools! I cannot hear
myself speak. Let some one call Gargouf! Is there no one to do
anything?"

One of the old men pottered off to do it, leaving her standing in the
middle of the terror-stricken group; a white pathetic little figure,
keeping fear at bay with both hands. The dark curtains behind threw
her face and form into high relief; but admiration was the last
thought in my mind.

"Mademoiselle," I said, "you must fly by the garden door."

She started and stared at me, her eyes dilating.

"Monsieur de Saux," she muttered. "Are you here? I do not--I do not
understand. I thought----"

"The village is rising," I said. "In a moment they will be here."

"They are here already," she answered faintly.

She meant only that she had seen their approach from the window; but a
dull murmur that at the moment rose on the air outside, and
penetrating the walls, grew each instant louder and more sinister,
seemed to give another significance to her words. The women listened
with white faces, then began to scream afresh. A reckless movement of
one of them dashed out the nearer of the two lights. The old man who
had admitted me began to whimper.

"O _mon Dieu!_" I cried fiercely, "can no one still these cravens?"
For the noise almost robbed me of the power of thought, and never had
thought been more necessary. "Be still, fools," I continued, "no one
will hurt _you_. And do you, Mademoiselle, please to come with me.
There is not a moment to be lost. The garden by which I entered----"

But she looked at me in such a way that I stopped.

"Is it necessary to go?" she said doubtfully. "Is there no other way,
Monsieur?"

The noise outside was growing louder. "What men have you?" I said.

"Here is Gargouf," she answered promptly. "He will tell you."

I turned to the staircase and saw the steward's face, at all times
harsh and grim, rising out of the well of the stairs. He had a candle
in one hand and a pistol in the other; and his features as his eyes
met mine wore an expression of dogged anger, the sight of which drew
fresh cries from the women. But I rejoiced to see him, for he at least
betrayed no signs of flinching. I asked him what men he had.

"You see them," he answered drily, betraying no surprise at my
presence.

"Only these?"

"There were three more," he said. "But I found the doors unbarred, and
the men gone. I am keeping this," he continued, with a dark glance at
his pistol, "for one of them."

"Mademoiselle must go!" I said.

He shrugged his shoulders with an indifference that maddened me.
"How?" he asked.

"By the garden door."

"They are there. The house is surrounded."

I cried out at that in despair; and on the instant, as if to give
point to his words, a furious blow fell on the great doors below, and
awakening every echo in the house, proclaimed that the moment was
come. A second shock followed; then a rain of blows. While the maids
shrieked and clung to one another, I looked at Mademoiselle, and she
at me.

"We must hide you," I muttered.

"No," she said.

"There must be some place," I said, looking round me desperately, and
disregarding her answer. The noise of the blows was deafening. "In
the----"

"I will not hide, Monsieur," she answered. Her cheeks were white, and
her eyes seemed to flicker with each blow. But the maiden who had been
dumb before me a few days earlier was gone; in her place I saw
Mademoiselle de St. Alais, conscious of a hundred ancestors. "They are
our people. I will meet them," she continued, stepping forward
bravely, though her lip trembled. "Then if they dare----"

"They are mad," I answered. "They are mad! Yet it is a chance; and we
have few! If I can get to them before they break in, I may do
something. One moment, Mademoiselle; screen the light, will you?"

Some one did so, and I turned feverishly and caught hold of the
curtain. But Gargouf was before me. He seized my arm, and for the
moment checked me.

"What is it? What are you going to do?" he growled.

"Speak to them from the window."

"They will not listen."

"Still I will try. What else is there?"

"Lead and iron," he answered in a tone that made me shiver. "Here are
M. le Marquis's sporting guns; they shoot straight. Take one, M. le
Vicomte; I will take the other. There are two more, and the men can
shoot. We can hold the staircase, at least."

I took one of the guns mechanically, amid a dismal uproar; wailing and
the thunder of blows within, outside the savage booing of the crowd.
No help could come for another hour; and for a moment in this
desperate strait my heart failed me. I wondered at the steward's
courage.

"You are not afraid?" I said. I knew how he had trampled on the poor
wretches outside; how he had starved them and ground them down, and
misused them through long years.

He cursed the dogs.

"You will stand by Mademoiselle?" I said feverishly. I think it was to
hearten myself by his assurance.

He squeezed my hand in a grip of iron, and I asked no more. In a
moment, however, I cried aloud.

"Ah, but they will burn the house!" I said. "What is the use of
holding the staircase, when they can burn us like rats?"

"We shall die together," was his only answer. And he kicked one of the
weeping, crouching women. "Be still, you whelp!" he said. "Do you
think that will help you?"

But I heard the door below groan, and I sprang to the window and
dragged aside the curtain, letting in a ruddy glow that dyed the
ceiling the colour of blood. My one fear was that I might be too late;
that the door would yield or the crowd break in at the back before I
could get a hearing. Luckily, the casement gave to the hand, and I
thrust it open, and, meeting a cold blast of air, in a twinkling was
outside, on the narrow ledge of the window over the great doors,
looking down on such a scene as few chteaux in France had witnessed
since the days of the third Henry--God be thanked!

A little to one side the great dovecot was burning, and sending up a
trail of smoke that, blown across the avenue, hid all beyond in a
murky reek, through which the flames now and again flickered hotly.
Men, busy as devils, black against the light, were plying the fire
with straw. Beyond the dovecot, an outhouse and a stack were blazing;
and nearer, immediately before the house, a crowd of moving figures
were hurrying to and fro, some battering the doors and windows, others
bringing fuel, all moving, yelling, laughing--laughing the laughter of
fiends to the music of crackling flames and shivering glass.

I saw Petit Jean in the forefront giving orders; and men round him.
There were women, too, hanging on the skirts of the men; and one
woman, in the midst of all, half-naked, screaming curses, and
brandishing her arms. It was she who added the last touch of horror to
the scene; and she, too, who saw me first, and pointed me out with
dreadful words, and cursed me, and the house, and cried for our blood.




                            CHAPTER VIII.

                               GARGOUF.


Some called for silence, while others stared at me stupidly, or
pointed me out to their fellows; but the greater part took up the
woman's cry, and, enraged by my presence, shook their fists at me, and
shouted vile threats and viler abuse. For a minute the air rang with
"_A bas les Seigneurs! A bas les tyrans!_" And I found this bad
enough. But, presently, whether they caught sight of the steward, or
merely returned to their first hatred, from which my appearance had
only for the moment diverted them, the cry changed to a sullen roar of
"Gargouf! Gargouf!" A roar so full of the lust for blood, and coupled
with threats so terrible, that the heart sickened and the cheek grew
pale at the sound.

"Gargouf! Gargouf! Give us Gargouf!" they howled. "Give us Gargouf!
and he shall eat hot gold! Give us Gargouf, and he shall need no more
of our daughters!"

I shuddered to think that Mademoiselle heard; shuddered to think of
the peril in which she stood. The wretches below were no longer men;
under the influence of this frenzied woman they were mad brute beasts,
drunk with fire and licence. As the smoke from the burning building
eddied away for a moment across the crowd and hid it, and still that
hoarse cry came out of the mirk, I could believe that I heard not men,
but maddened hounds raving in the kennel.

Again the smoke drifted away; and some one in the rear shot at me. I
heard the glass splinter beside me. Another, a little nearer, flung up
a burning fragment that, alighting on the ledge, blazed and spluttered
by my foot. I kicked it down.

The act, for the moment, stilled the riot, and I seized the
opportunity. "You dogs!" I said, striving to make my voice heard above
the hissing of the flames. "Begone! The soldiers from Cahors are on
the road. I sent for them this hour back. Begone, before they come,
and I will intercede for you. Stay, and do further mischief, and you
shall hang, to the last man!"

Some answered with a yell of derision, crying out that the soldiers
were with them. More, that the nobles were abolished, and their houses
given to the people. One, who was drunk, kept shouting, "_A bas la
Bastille! A bas la Bastille!_" with a stupid persistence.

A moment more and I should lose my chance. I waved my hand! "What do
you want?" I cried.

"Justice!" one shouted, and another, "Vengeance!" A third, "Gargouf!"
And then all, "Gargouf! Gargouf!" until Petit Jean stilled the tumult.

"Have done!" he cried to them, in his coarse, brutal voice. "Have we
come here only to yell? And do you, Seigneur, give up Gargouf, and you
shall go free. Otherwise, we will burn the house, and all in it."

"You villain!" I said. "We have guns, and----"

"The rats have teeth, but they burn! They burn!" he answered, pointing
triumphantly, with the axe he held, to the flaming buildings. "They
burn! Yet listen, Seigneur," he continued, "and you shall have a
minute to make up your minds. Give up Gargouf to us to do with as we
please, and the rest shall go."

"All?"

"All."

I trembled. "But Gargouf, man?" I said. "Will you--what will you do
with him?"

"Roast him!" the smith cried, with a fearful oath; and the wretches
round him laughed like fiends. "Roast him, when we have plucked him
bare."

I shuddered. From Cahors help could not come for another hour. From
Saux it might not come at all. The doors below me could not stand
long, and these brutes were thirty to one, and mad with the lust of
vengeance. With the wrongs, the crimes, the vices of centuries to
avenge, they dreamed that the day of requital was come; and the dream
had turned clods into devils. The very flames they had kindled gave
them assurance of it. The fire was in their blood. _A bas la Bastille!
A bas les tyrans!_

I hesitated.

"One minute!" the smith cried, with a boastful gesture--"one minute we
give you! Gargouf or all."

"Wait!"

I turned and went in--turned from the smoky glare, the circling
pigeons, the grotesque black figures, and the terror and confusion of
the night, and went in to that other scene scarcely less dreadful to
me; though only two candles, guttering in tin sockets, lit the
landing, and it borrowed from the outside no more than the ruddy
reflection of horror. The women had ceased to scream and sob, and
crowded together silent and panic-stricken. The old men and the lad
moistened their lips, and looked furtively from the arms they handled
to one another's faces. Mademoiselle alone stood erect, pale, firm. I
shot a glance at the slender little figure in the white robe, then I
looked away. I dared not say what I had in my mind. I knew that she
had heard, and----

She said it! "You have answered them?" she muttered, her eyes meeting
mine.

"No," I said, looking away again. "They have given us a minute to
decide, and----"

"I heard them," she answered shivering. "Tell them."

"But, Mademoiselle----"

"Tell them never! Never!" she cried feverishly. "Be quick, or they
will think that we are dreaming of it."

Yet I hesitated--while the flames crackled outside. What, after all,
was this rascal's life beside hers? What his tainted existence, who
all these years had ground the faces of the poor and dishonoured the
helpless, beside her youth? It was a dreadful moment, and I hesitated.
"Mademoiselle," I muttered at last, avoiding her eyes, "you have
not thought, perhaps. But to refuse this offer may be to sacrifice
all--and not save him."

"I have thought!" she answered, with a passionate gesture. "I have
thought. But he was my father's steward, Monsieur, and he is my
brother's; if he has sinned, it was for them. It is for them to pay
the penalty. And--after all, it may not come to that," she continued,
her face changing, and her eyes seeking mine, full of sudden terror.
"They will not dare, I think. They will never dare to----"

"Where is he?" I asked hoarsely.

She pointed to the corner behind her. I looked, and could scarcely
believe my eyes. The man whom I had left full of a desperate courage,
prepared to sell his life dearly, now crouched a huddled figure in the
darkest angle of the tapestry seat. Though I had spoken of him in a
low voice, and without naming him, he heard me, and looked up, and
showed a face to match his attitude; a face pallid and sweating with
fear; a face that, vile at the best and when redeemed by hardihood,
looked now the vilest thing on earth. _Ciel!_ that fear should reduce
a man to that! He tried to speak as his eyes met mine, but his lips
moved inaudibly, and he only crouched lower, the picture of panic and
guilt.

I cried out to the others to know what had happened to him. "What is
it?" I said.

No one answered; and then I seemed to know. While he had thought all
in danger, while he had felt himself only one among many, the common
courage of a man had supported him. But God knows what voices, only
too well known to him, what accents of starving men and wronged women,
had spoken in that fierce cry for his life! What plaints from the
dead, what curses of babes hanging on dry breasts! At any rate,
whatever he had heard in that call for his blood, _his_ blood--it had
unmanned him. In a moment, in a twinkling, it had dashed him back into
this corner, a trembling craven, holding up his hands for his life.

Such fear is infectious, and I strode to him in a rage and shook him.

"Get up, hound!" I said. "Get up and strike a blow for your life; or,
by heaven, no one else will!"

He stood up. "Yes, yes, Monsieur," he muttered. "I will! I will stand
up for Mademoiselle. I will----"

But I heard his teeth chatter, and I saw that his eyes wandered this
way and that, as do a hare's when the dogs close on it; and I knew
that I had nothing to expect from him. A howl outside warned me at the
same moment that our respite was spent; and I flung him off and turned
to the window.

Too late, however; before I could reach it, a thundering blow on the
doors below set the candles flickering and the women shrieking; then
for an instant I thought that all was over. A stone came through the
window; another followed it, and another. The shattered glass fell
over us; the draught put out one light, and the women, terrified
beyond control, ran this way and that with the other, shrieking
dismally. This, the yelling of the crowd outside, the sombre light and
more sombre glare, the utter confusion and panic, so distracted me,
that for a moment I stood irresolute, inactive, looking wildly about
me; a poltroon waiting for some one to lead. Then a touch fell on my
arm, and I turned and found Mademoiselle at my side, and saw her face
upturned to mine.

It was white, and her eyes were wide with the terror she had so long
repressed. Her hold on me grew heavier; she swayed against me,
clinging to me.

"Oh!" she whispered in my ear in a voice that went to my heart. "Save
me! Save me! Can nothing be done? Can nothing be done, Monsieur? Must
we die?"

"We must gain time," I said. My courage returned wonderfully, as I
felt her weight on my arm. "All is not over yet," I said. "I will
speak to them."

And setting her on the seat, I sprang to the window and passed through
it. Outside, things at a first glance seemed unchanged. The wavering
flames, the glow, the trail of smoke and sparks, all were there. But a
second glance showed that the rioters no longer moved to and fro about
the fire, but were massed directly below me in a dense body round the
doors, waiting for them to give way. I shouted to them frantically,
hoping still to delay them. I called Petit Jean by name. But I could
not make myself heard in the uproar, or they would not heed; and while
I vainly tried, the great doors yielded at last, and with a roar of
triumph the crowd burst in.

Not a moment was to be lost. I sprang back through the window,
clutching up as I did so the gun Gargouf had given me; and then I
stood in amazement. The landing was empty! The rush of feet across the
hall below shook the house. Ten seconds and the mob, whose screams of
triumph already echoed through the passages, would be on us. But where
was Mademoiselle? Where was Gargouf? Where were the servants, the
waiting-maids, the boy, whom I had left here?

I stood an instant paralysed, like a man in a nightmare; brought up
short in that supreme moment. Then, as the first crash of heavy feet
sounded on the stairs, I heard a faint scream, somewhere to my right,
as I stood. On the instant I sprang to the door which, on that side,
led to the left wing. I tore it open and passed through it--not a
moment too soon. The slightest delay, and the foremost rioters must
have seen me. As it was I had time to turn the key, which,
fortunately, was on the inside.

Then I hurried across the room, making my way to an open door at the
farther end, from which light issued; I passed through the room
beyond, which was empty, then into the last of the suite.

Here I found the fugitives; who had fled so precipitately that they
had not even thought of closing the doors behind them. In this last
refuge--Madame's boudoir, all white and gold--I found them crouching
among gilt-backed chairs and flowered cushions. They had brought only
one candle with them; and the silks and gew-gaws and knick-knacks on
which its light shone dimly, gave a peculiar horror to their white
faces and glaring eyes, as, almost mad with terror, they huddled in
the farthest corner and stared at me.

They were such cowards that they put Mademoiselle foremost; or it was
she who stood out to meet me. She knew me before they did, therefore,
and quieted them. When I could hear my own voice, I asked where
Gargouf was.

They had not discovered that he was not with them, and they cried out,
saying that he had come that way.

"You followed him?"

"Yes, Monsieur."

This explained their flight, but not the steward's absence. What
matter where he had gone, however, since his help could avail little.
I looked round--looked round in despair; the very simpering Cupids on
the walls seemed to mock our danger. I had the gun, I could fire one
shot, I had one life in my hands. But to what end? In a moment, at any
moment, within a minute or two at most, the doors would be forced, and
the horde of mad brutes would pour in upon us, and----

"Ah, Monsieur, the closet staircase! He has gone by the closet
staircase!"

It was the boy who spoke. He alone of them had his wits about him.

"Where is it?" I said.

The lad sprang forward to show me, but Mademoiselle was before him
with the candle. She flew back into the passage, a passage of four or
five feet only between that room and the second of the suite; in the
wall of this she flung open a door, apparently of a closet. I looked
in and saw the beginning of a staircase. My heart leapt at the sight.

"To the floor above?" I said.

"No, Monsieur, to the roof!"

"Up, up, then!" I cried in a frenzy of impatience. "It will give us
time. Quick. They are coming."

For I heard the door at the end of the suite, the door I had locked,
creak and yield. They were forcing it, at any moment it might give;
where I stood waiting to bring up the rear, their hoarse cries and
curses came to my ears. But the good door held; it held, long enough
at any rate. Before it gave way we were on the stairs and I had shut
the door of the closet behind me. Then, holding to the skirts of the
woman before me, I groped my way up quickly--up and up through
darkness with a close smell of bats in my nostrils--and almost before
I could believe it, I stood with the panting, trembling group on the
roof. The glare of the burning outhouses below shone on a great stack
of chimneys beside us and reddened the sky above, and burnished the
leaves of the chestnut trees that rose on a level with our eyes. But
all the lower part of the steep roofs round us, and the lead gutters
that ran between them, lay in darkness, the denser for the contrast.
The flames crackled below, and a thick reek of smoke swept up past the
coping, but the noise alike of fire and riot was deadened here. The
night wind cooled our brows, and I had a minute in which to think, to
breathe, to look round.

"Is there any other way to the roof?" I asked anxiously.

"One other, Monsieur!"

"Where? Or do you stay here, and guard this door," I said, pressing my
gun on the man who had answered. "And let the boy come and show me.
Mademoiselle, stay there if you please."

The boy ran before me to the farther end of the roof, and in a lead
walk, between two slopes, showed me a large trap-door. It had no
fastening on the outside, and for a moment I stood nonplussed; then I
saw, a few feet away, a neat pile of bricks, left there, I learned
afterwards, in the course of some repairs. I began to remove them as
fast as I could to the trap-door, and the boy saw and followed my
example; in two minutes we had stacked a hundred and more on the door.
Telling him to add another hundred to the number, I left him at the
task and flew back to the women.

They might burn the house under us; that always, and for certain, and
it meant a dreadful death. Yet I breathed more freely here. In the
white and gold room below, among Madame's mirrors and Cupids, and
silken cushions, and painted Venuses, my heart had failed me. The
place, with its heavy perfumes, had stifled me. I had pictured the
brutish peasants bursting in on us there--on the screaming women,
crouching vainly behind chairs and couches; and the horror of the
thought overcame me. Here, in the open, under the sky, we could at
least die fighting. The depth yawned beyond the coping; the weakest
had here no more to fear than death. Besides we had a respite, for the
house was large, and the fire could not lick it up in a moment.

And help might come. I shaded my eyes from the light below, and looked
into the darkness in the direction of the village and the Cahors road.
In an hour, at furthest, help might come. The glare in the sky must be
visible for miles; it would spur on the avengers. Father Benit, too,
if he could get help--he might be here at any time. We were not
without hope.

Suddenly, while we stood together, the women sobbing and whimpering,
the old man-servant spoke.

"Where is M. Gargouf?" he muttered under his breath.

"Ah!" I exclaimed; "I had forgotten him."

"He came up," the man continued, peering about him. "This door was
open, M. le Vicomte, when we came to it."

"Ah! then where is he?"

I looked round too. All the roof, I have said, was dark, and not all
of it was on the same level; and here and there chimneys broke the
view. In the obscurity, the steward might be lurking close to us
without our knowledge; or he might have thrown himself down in
despair. While I looked, the boy whom I had left by the bricks came
flying to us.

"There is some one there!" he said. And he clung to the old man in
terror.

"It must be Gargouf!" I answered. "Wait here!" And, disregarding the
women's prayers that I would stay with them, I went quickly along the
leads to the other trap-door, and peered about me through the gloom.
For a moment I could see no one, though the light shining on the trees
made it easy to discern figures standing nearer the coping. Presently,
however, I caught the sound of some one moving; some one who was
farther away still, at the very edge of the roof. I went on
cautiously, expecting I do not know what; and close to a stack of
chimneys I found Gargouf.

He was crouching on the coping in the darkest part, where the end wall
of the east wing overlooked the garden by which I had entered. This
end wall had no windows, and the greater part of the garden below it
lay it darkness; the angle of the house standing between it and the
burning buildings. I supposed that the steward had sneaked hither,
therefore, to hide; and set it down to the darkness that he did not
know me, but, as I approached, he rose on his knees on the ledge, and
turned on me, snarling like a dog.

"Stand back!" he said, in a voice that was scarcely human. "Stand
back, or I will----"

"Steady, man," I answered quietly, beginning to think that fear had
unhinged him. "It is I, M. de Saux."

"Stand back!" was his only answer; and, though he cowered so low
that I could not get his figure against the shining trees, I saw a
pistol-barrel gleam as he levelled it. "Stand back! Give me a minute!
a minute only"--and his voice quavered--"and I will cheat the devils
yet! Come nearer, or give the alarm, and I will not die alone! I will
not die alone! Stand back!"

"Are you mad?" I said.

"Back, or I shoot!" he growled. "I will not die alone."

He was kneeling on the very edge, with his left hand against the
chimney. To rush upon him in that posture was to court death; and I
had nothing to gain by it. I stepped back a pace. As I did so, at the
moment I did so, he slid over the edge, and was gone!

I drew a deep breath and listened, flinching and drawing back
involuntarily. But I heard no sound of a fall; and in a moment, with a
new idea in my mind, I stepped forward to the edge, and looked over.

The steward hung in mid-air, a dozen feet below me. He was descending;
descending foot by foot, slowly, and by jerks; a dim figure, growing
dimmer. Instinctively I felt about me; and in a second laid my hand on
the rope by which he hung. It was secured round the chimney. Then I
understood. He had conceived this way of escape, perhaps had stored
the rope for it beforehand, and, like the villain he was, had kept the
thought to himself, that his chance might be the better, and that he
might not have to give the first place to Mademoiselle and the women.
In the first heat of the discovery, I almost found it in my heart to
cut the rope, and let him fall; then I remembered that if he escaped,
the way would lie open for others; and then, even as I thought this,
into the garden below me, there shone a sudden flare of light, and a
stream of a dozen rioters poured round the corner, and made for the
door by which I had entered the house.

I held my breath. The steward, hanging below me, and by this time
half-way to the ground, stopped, and moved not a limb. But he still
swung a little this way and that, and in the strong light of the
torches which the new-comers carried, I could see every knot in the
rope, and even the trailing end, which, as I looked, moved on the
ground with his motion.

The wretches, making for the door, had to pass within a pace of the
rope, of that trailing end; yet it was possible that, blinded by the
lights they carried, and their own haste and excitement, they might
not see it. I held my breath as the leader came abreast of it; I
fancied that he must see it. But he passed, and disappeared in the
doorway. Three others passed the rope together. A fifth, then three
more, two more; I began to breathe more freely. Only one remained--a
woman, the same whose imprecations had greeted me on my appearance at
the window. It was not likely that she would see it. She was running
to overtake the others; she carried a flare in her right hand, so that
the blaze came between her and the rope. And she was waving the light
in a mad woman's frenzy, as she danced along, hounding on the men to
the sack.

But, as if the presence of the man who had wronged her had over her
some subtle influence--as if some sense, unowned by others, warned her
of his presence, even in the midst of that babel and tumult--she
stopped short under him, with her foot almost on the threshold. I saw
her head turn slowly. She raised her eyes, holding the torch aside.
She saw him!

With a scream of joy, she sprang to the foot of the rope, and began to
haul at it as if in that way she might get to him sooner; while she
filled the air with her shrieks and laughter. The men, who had gone
into the house, heard her, and came out again; and after them others.
I quailed, where I knelt on the parapet, as I looked down and met the
wolfish glare of their upturned eyes; what, then, must have been the
thoughts of the wretched man taken in his selfishness--hanging there
helpless between earth and heaven? God knows.

He began to climb upwards, to return; and actually ascended hand over
hand a dozen feet. But he had been supporting himself for some
minutes, and at that point his strength failed him. Human muscles
could do no more. He tried to haul himself up to the next knot, but
sank back with a groan. Then he looked at me. "Pull me up!" he gasped
in a voice just audible. "For God's sake! For God's sake, pull me up!"

But the wretches below had the end of the rope, and it was impossible
to raise him, even had I possessed the strength to do it. I told him
so, and bade him climb--climb for his life. In a moment it would be
too late.

He understood. He raised himself with a jerk to the next knot, and
hung there. Another desperate effort, and he gained the next; though I
could almost hear his muscles crack, and his breath came in gasps.
Three more knots--they were about a foot apart--and he would reach the
coping.

But as he turned up his face to me, I read despair in his eyes. His
strength was gone; and while he hung there, the men began, with shouts
of laughter, to shake the rope this way and that. He lost his grip,
and, with a groan, slid down three or four feet; and again got hold
and hung there--silent.

By this time the group below had grown into a crowd--a crowd of
maddened beings, raving and howling, and leaping up at him as dogs
leap at food; and the horror of the sight, though the doomed man's
features were now in shadow, and I could not read them, overcame me. I
rose to draw back--shuddering, listening for his fall. Instead, before
I had quite retreated, a hot flash blinded me, and almost scorched my
face, and, as the sharp report of a pistol rang out, the steward's
body plunged headlong down--leaving a little cloud of smoke where I
stood.

He had balked his enemies.




                             CHAPTER IX.

                            THE TRICOLOUR.


It was known afterwards that they fell upon the body and tore it, like
the dogs they were; but I had seen enough. I reeled back, and for a
few moments leaned against the chimney, trembling like a woman, sick
and faint. The horrid drama had had only one spectator--myself; and
the strange solitude from which I had viewed it, kneeling at the edge
of the roof of the Chteau, with the night wind on my brow and the
tumult far below me, had shaken me to the bottom of my soul. Had the
ruffians come upon me then I could not have lifted a finger; but,
fortunately, though the awakening came quickly, it came by another
hand. I heard the rustle of feet behind me, and, turning, found
Mademoiselle de St. Alais at my shoulder, her small face grey in the
gloom.

"Monsieur," she said, "will you come?"

I sprang up, ashamed and conscience-stricken. I had forgotten her,
all, in the tragedy. "What is it?" I said.

"The house is burning."

She said it so calmly, in such a voice, that I could not believe her,
or that I understood; though it was the thing I had told myself must
happen. "What, Mademoiselle? This house?" I said stupidly.

"Yes," she replied, as quietly as before. "The smoke is rising through
the closet staircase. I think that they have set the east wing on
fire."

I hastened back with her, but before I reached the little door by
which we had ascended I saw that it was true. A faint, whitish eddy of
smoke, scarcely visible in the dusk, was rising through the crack
between door and lintel. When we came up the women were still round it
watching it; but while I looked, dazed and wondering what we were to
do, the group melted away, and Mademoiselle and I were left alone
beside the stream of smoke that grew each moment thicker and darker.

A few moments before, immediately after my escape from the rooms
below, I had thought that I could face this peril; anything,
everything, had then seemed better than to be caught with the women,
in the confinement of those luxurious rooms, perfumed with _poudre de
rose_, and heavy with jasmine--to be caught there by the brutes who
were pursuing us. Now the danger that showed itself most pressing
seemed the worst. "We must take off the bricks!" I cried. "Quick, and
open that door! There is nothing else for it. Come, Mademoiselle, if
you please!"

"They are doing it," she answered.

Then I saw whither the women and the servants had gone. They were
already beside the other door, the trap-door, labouring frantically to
remove the bricks we had piled on it. In a moment I caught the
infection of their haste.

"Come, Mademoiselle! come!" I cried, advancing involuntarily a step
towards the group. "Very likely the rogues below will be plundering
now, and we may pass safely. At any rate, there is nothing else for
it."

I was still flurried and shaken--I say it with shame--by Gargouf's
fate; and when she did not answer at once, I looked round impatiently.
To my astonishment, she was gone. In the darkness, it was not easy to
see any one at a distance of a dozen feet, and the reek of the smoke
was spreading. Still, she had been at my elbow a moment before, she
could not be far off. I took a step this way and that, and looked
again anxiously; and then I found her. She was kneeling against a
chimney, her face buried in her hands. Her hair covered her shoulders,
and partly hid her white robe.

I thought the time ill-chosen, and I touched her angrily.
"Mademoiselle!" I said. "There is not a moment to be lost! Come! they
have opened the door!"

She looked up at me, and the still pallor of her face sobered me. "I
am not coming," she said, in a low voice. "Farewell, Monsieur!"

"You are not coming?" I cried.

"No, Monsieur; save yourself," she answered firmly and quietly. And
she looked up at me with her hands still clasped before her, as if she
were fain to return to her prayers, and waited only for me to go.

I gasped.

"But, Mademoiselle!" I cried, staring at the white-robed figure, that
in the gloom--a gloom riven now and again by hot flashes, as some
burning spark soared upwards--seemed scarcely earthly--"But,
Mademoiselle, you do not understand. This is no child's play. To stay
here is death! death! The house is burning under us. Presently the
roof, on which we stand, will fall in, and then----"

"Better that," she answered, raising her head with heaven knows
what of womanly dignity, caught in this supreme moment by her, a
child--"Better that, than that I should fall into their hands. I am a
St. Alais, and I can die," she continued firmly. "But I must not fall
into their hands. Do you, Monsieur, save yourself. Go now, and I will
pray for you."

"And I for you, Mademoiselle," I answered, with a full heart. "If you
stay, I stay."

She looked at me a moment, her face troubled. Then she rose slowly to
her feet. The servants had disappeared, the trap-door lay open; no one
had yet come up. We had the roof to ourselves. I saw her shudder as
she looked round; and in a second I had her in my arms--she was no
heavier than a child--and was half-way across the roof. She uttered a
faint cry of remonstrance, of reproach, and for an instant struggled
with me. But I only held her the tighter, and ran on. From the
trap-door a ladder led downwards; somehow, still holding her with one
hand, I stumbled down it, until I reached the foot, and found myself
in a passage, which was all dark. One way, however, a light shone at
the end of it.

I carried her towards this, her hair lying across my lips, her face
against my breast. She no longer struggled, and in a moment I came to
the head of a staircase. It seemed to be a servant's staircase, for it
was bare, and mean, and narrow, with white-washed walls that were not
too clean. There were no signs of fire here, even the smoke had not
yet reached this part; but half-way down the flight a candle,
overturned, but still burning, lay on a step, as if some one had that
moment dropped it. And from all the lower part of the house came up a
great noise of riot and revelry, coarse shrieks, and shouts, and
laughter. I paused to listen.

Mademoiselle lifted herself a little in my arms. "Put me down,
Monsieur," she whispered.

"You will come?"

"I will do what you tell me."

I set her down in the angle of the passage, at the head of the stairs;
and in a whisper I asked her what was beyond the door, which I could
see at the foot of the flight.

"The kitchen," she answered.

"If I had any cloak to cover you," I said, "I think that we could
pass. They are not searching for us. They are robbing and drinking."

"Will you get the candle?" she whispered, trembling. "In one of these
rooms we may find something."

I went softly down the bare stairs, and, picking it up, returned with
it in my hand. As I came back to her, our eyes met, and a slow blush,
gradually deepening, crept over her face, as dawn creeps over a grey
sky. Having come, it stayed; her eyes fell, and she turned a little
away from me, confused and frightened. We were alone; and for the
first time that night, I think, she remembered her loosened hair and
the disorder of her dress--that she was a woman and I a man.

It was a strange time to think of such things; when at any instant the
door at the foot of the stairs before us might open, and a dozen
ruffians stream up, bent on plunder, and worse. But the look and the
movement warmed my heart, and set my blood running as it had never run
before. I felt my courage return in a flood, and with it twice my
strength. I felt capable of holding the staircase against a hundred, a
thousand, as long as she stood at the top. Above all, I wondered how I
could have borne her in my arms a minute before, how I could have held
her head against my breast, and felt her hair touch my lips, and been
insensible! Never again should I carry her so with an even pulse. The
knowledge of that came to me as I stood beside her at the head of the
bare stairs, affecting to listen to the noises below, that she might
have time to recover herself.

A moment, and I began to listen seriously; for the uproar in the
kitchen through which we must pass to escape, was growing louder; and
at the same time that I noticed this, a smell of burning wood, with a
whiff of smoke, reached my nostrils, and warned me that the fire was
extending to the wing in which we stood. Behind us, as we stood,
looking down the stairs, was a door; along the passage to the left by
which we had come were other doors. I thrust the candle into
Mademoiselle's hands, and begged her to go and look in the rooms.

"There may be a cloak, or something!" I said eagerly. "We must not
linger. If you will look, I will----"

No more; for as the last word trembled on my lips the door at the foot
of the stairs flew open, and a man blundered through it and began to
ascend towards us, two steps at a time. He carried a candle before
him, and a large bar in his right hand; and a savage roar of voices
came with him through the doorway.

He appeared so suddenly that we had no time to move. I had a side
glimpse of Mademoiselle standing spell-bound with horror, the light
drooping in her hand. Then I snatched the candle from her and quenched
it; and, plucking it from the iron candlestick, stood waiting, with
the latter in my hand--waiting, stooping forward, for the man. I had
left my sword in the farther wing, and had no other weapon; but the
stairs were narrow, the sloping ceiling low, and the candlestick might
do. If his comrades did not follow him, it might do.

He came up rapidly, two-thirds of the way, holding the light high in
front of him. Only four or five steps divided him from us! Then on a
sudden, he stumbled, swore, and fell heavily forwards. The light in
his hand went out, and we were in darkness!

Instinctively I gripped Mademoiselle's hand in my left hand to stay
the scream that I knew was on her lips; then we stood like two
statues, scarcely daring to breathe. The man, so near us, and yet
unconscious of our presence, got up swearing; and, after a terrible
moment of suspense, during which I think he fumbled for the candle, he
began to clatter down the stairs again. They had closed the door at
the bottom, and he could not for a moment find the string of the
latch. But at last he found it, and opened the door. Then I stepped
back, and under cover of the babel that instantly poured up the
staircase I drew Mademoiselle into the room behind us, and, closing
the door which faced the stairs, stood listening.

I fancied that I could hear her heart beating. I could certainly hear
my own. In this room we seemed for the moment safe; but how were we,
without a light, to find anything to disguise her? How were we to pass
through the kitchen? And in a moment I began to regret that I had left
the stairs. We were in perfect darkness here and could see nothing in
the room, which had a close, unused smell, as of mice; but even as I
noticed this the fumes of burning wood, which had doubtless entered
with us, grew stronger and overcame the other smell. The rushing
wind-like sound of the fire, as it caught hold of the wing, began to
be audible, and the distant crackling of flames. My heart sank.

"Mademoiselle," I said softly. I still held her hand.

"Yes, Monsieur," she murmured faintly. And she seemed to lean against
me.

"Are there no windows in this room?"

"I think that they are shuttered," she murmured.

With a new thought in my mind, that the way of the kitchen being
hopeless we might escape by the windows, I moved a pace to look for
them. I would have loosed her hand to do this, that my own might be
free to grope before me, but to my surprise she clung to me and would
not let me go. Then in the darkness I heard her sigh, as if she were
about to swoon; and she fell against me.

"Courage, Mademoiselle, courage!" I said, terrified by the mere
thought.

"Oh, I am frightened!" she moaned in my ear. "I am frightened! Save
me, Monsieur, save me!"

She had been so brave before that I wondered; not knowing that the
bravest woman's courage is of this quality. But I had short time for
wonder. Her weight hung each instant more dead in my arms, and my
heart beating wildly as I held her I looked round for help, for a
thought, for an idea. But all was dark. I could not remember even
where the door stood by which we had entered. I peered in vain, for
the slightest glimmer of light that might betray the windows. I was
alone with her and helpless, our way of retreat cut off, the flames
approaching. I felt her head fall back and knew that she had swooned;
and in the dark I could do no more than support her, and listen and
listen for the returning steps of the man, or what else would happen
next.

For a long time, a long time it seemed to me, nothing happened. Then a
sudden burst of sound told me that the door at the foot of the stairs
had been opened again; and on that followed a clatter of wooden shoes
on the bare stairs. I could judge now where the door of the room was,
and I quickly but tenderly laid Mademoiselle on the floor a little
behind it, and waited myself on the threshold. I still had my
candlestick, and I was desperate.

I heard them pass, my heart beating; and then I heard them pause and I
clutched my weapon; and then a voice I knew gave an order, and with a
cry of joy I dragged open the door of the room and stood before
them--stood before them, as they told me afterwards, with the face of
a ghost or a man risen from the dead.

There were four of them, and the nearest to us was Father Benit.

The good priest fell on my neck and kissed me. "You are not hurt?" he
cried.

"No," I said dully. "You have come then?"

"Yes," he said. "In time to save you, God be praised! God be praised!
And Mademoiselle? Mademoiselle de St. Alais?" he added eagerly,
looking at me as if he thought I was not quite in my senses. "Have you
news of her?"

I turned without a word, and went back into the room. He followed
with a light, and the three men, of whom Buton was one, pressed in
after him. They were rough peasants, but the sight made them give
back, and uncover themselves. Mademoiselle lay where I had left her,
her head pillowed on a dark carpet of hair; from the midst of which
her child's face, composed and white as in death, looked up with
solemn half-closed eyes to the ceiling. For myself, I stared down at
her almost without emotion, so much had I gone through. But the priest
cried out aloud.

"_Mon Dieu!_" he said, with a sob in his voice. "Have they killed
her?"

"No," I answered. "She has only fainted. If there is a woman here----"

"There is no woman here that I dare trust," he answered between his
teeth. And he bade one of the men go and get some water, adding a few
words which I did not hear.

The man returned almost immediately, and Father Benit, bidding him
and his fellows stand back a little, moistened her lips with water,
afterwards dashing some in her face; doing it with an air of haste
that puzzled me until I noticed that the room was grown thick with
smoke, and on going myself to the door saw the red glow of the fire at
the end of the passage, and heard the distant crash of falling stones
and timbers. Then I thought that I understood the men's attitude, and
I suggested to Father Benit that I should carry her out.

"She will never recover here," I said, with a sob in my throat. "She
will be suffocated if we do not get her into the air."

A thick volume of smoke swept along the passage as I spoke, and gave
point to my words.

"Yes," the priest said slowly, "I think so, too, my son, but----"

"But what?" I cried. "It is not safe to stay!"

"You sent to Cahors?"

"Yes," I answered. "Has M. le Marquis come?"

"No; and you see, M. le Vicomte, I have only these four men," he
explained. "Had I stayed to gather more I might have been too late.
And with these only I do not know what to do. Half the poor wretches
who have done this mischief are mad with drink. Others are strangers,
and----"

"But I thought--I thought that it was all over," I cried in
astonishment.

"No," he answered gravely. "They let us pass in after an altercation;
I am of the Committee, and so is Buton there. But when they see you,
and especially Mademoiselle de St. Alais--I do not know how they may
act, my friend."

"But, _mon Dieu!_" I cried. "Surely they will not dare----"

"No, Monseigneur, have no fear, they shall not dare!"

The words came out of the smoke. The speaker was Buton. As he spoke,
he stepped forward, swinging the ponderous bar he carried, his huge
hairy arms bare to the elbow. "Yet there is one thing you must do," he
said.

"What?"

"You must put on the tricolour. They will not dare to touch that."

He spoke with a simple pride, which at the moment I found
unintelligible. I understand it better now. Nay, on the morrow, it was
no riddle to me, though an abiding wonder.

The priest sprang at the idea. "Good," he said. "Buton has hit it!
They will respect that."

And before I could speak he had detached the large rosette which he
wore on his _soutane_, and was pinning it on my breast.

"Now yours, Buton," he continued; and taking the smith's--it was not
too clean--he fixed it on Mademoiselle's left shoulder. "There," he
said eagerly, when it was done. "Now, M. le Vicomte, take her up.
Quick, or we shall be stifled. Buton and I will go before you, and our
friends here will follow you."

Mademoiselle was beginning to come to herself with sighs and sobs,
when I raised her in my arms; and we were all coughing with the smoke.
This in the passage outside was choking; had we delayed a minute
longer we could not have passed out safely, for already the flames
were beginning to lick the door of the next room, and dart out angry
tongues towards us. As it was, we stumbled down the stairs in some
fashion, one helping another; and checked for an instant by the closed
door at the bottom, were glad to fall when it was opened pell-mell in
the kitchen, where we stood with smarting eyes, gasping for breath.

It was the grand kitchen of the Chteau that had seen many a feast
prepared, and many a quarry brought home; but for Mademoiselle's sake
I was glad that her face was against my breast, and that she could not
see it now. A great fire, fed high with fat and hams, blazed on the
hearth, and before it, instead of meat, the carcases of three dogs
hung from the jack, and tainted the air with the smell of burning
flesh. They were M. le Marquis' favourite hounds, killed in pure
wantonness. Below them the floor, strewn with bottles, ran deep in
wasted wine, out of which piles of shattered furniture and staved
casks rose like islands. All that the rioters had not taken they had
spoiled; even now in one corner a woman was filling her apron with
salt from a huge trampled heap, and at the battered _dressoir_ three
or four men were plundering. The main body of the peasants, however,
had retired outside, where they could be heard fiercely cheering on
the flames, shouting when a chimney fell or a window burst, and
flinging into the fire every living thing unlucky enough to fall into
their hands. The plunderers, on seeing us, sneaked out with grim looks
like wolves driven from the prey. Doubtless, they spread the news; for
while we paused, though it was only for a moment, in the middle of the
floor, the uproar outside ceased, and gave place to a strange silence
in the midst of which we appeared at the door.

The glare of the burning house threw a light as strong as that of day
on the scene before us; on the line of savage frenzied faces that
confronted us, and the great pile of wreckage that stood about and
bore witness to their fury. But for a moment the light failed to show
us to them; we were in the shadow of the wall, and it was not until we
had advanced some paces that the ominous silence was broken, and the
mob, with a howl of rage, sprang forward, like bloodhounds slipped
from the leash. Low-browed and shock-headed, half-naked, and black
with smoke and blood, they seemed more like beasts than men; and like
beasts they came on, snapping the teeth and snarling, while from the
rear--for the foremost were past speech--came screams of "_Mort aux
Tyrans! Mort aux Accapareurs!_" that, mingling with the tumult of the
fire, were enough to scare the stoutest.

Had my escort blenched for an instant our fate was sealed. But they
stood firm, and before their stern front all but one man quailed and
fell back--fell back snarling and crying for our blood. That one came
on, and aimed a blow at me with a knife. On the instant Buton raised
his iron bar, and with a stentorian cry of "Respect the Tricolour!"
struck him to the ground, and strode over him.

"Respect the Tricolour!" he shouted again, with the voice of a bull;
and the effect of the words was magical. The crowd heard, fell back,
and fell aside, staring stupidly at me and my burden.

"Respect the Tricolour!" Father Benit cried, raising his hand aloft;
and he made the sign of the cross. On that in an instant a hundred
voices took it up; and almost before I could apprehend the change,
those who a moment earlier had been gaping for our blood were
thrusting one another back, and shouting as with one voice, "Way, way
for the Tricolour!"

There was something unutterably new, strange, formidable in this
reverence; this respect paid by these savages to a word, a ribbon, an
idea. It made an impression on me that was never quite effaced. But at
the moment I was scarcely conscious of this. I heard and saw things
dully. Like a man in a dream, I walked through the crowd, and,
stumbling under my burden, passed down the lane of brutish faces, down
the avenue, down to the gate. There Father Benit would have taken
Mademoiselle from me, but I would not let him.

"To Saux! To Saux!" I said feverishly; and then, I scarcely knew how,
I found myself on a horse holding her before me. And we were on the
road to Saux, lighted on our way by the flames of the burning Chteau.




                              CHAPTER X.

                     THE MORNING AFTER THE STORM.


Father Benit had the forethought, when we reached the cross-roads, to
leave a man there to await the party from Cahors, and warn them of
Mademoiselle's safety; and we had not ridden more than half a mile
before the clatter of hoofs behind us announced that they were
following. I was beginning to recover from the stupor into which the
excitement of the night had thrown me, and I reined up to deliver over
my charge, should M. de St. Alais desire to take her.

But he was not of the party. The leader was Louis, and his company
consisted, to my surprise, of no more than six or seven servants, old
M. de Gontaut, one of the Harincourts, and a strange gentleman. Their
horses were panting and smoking with the speed at which they had come,
and the men's eyes glittered with excitement. No one seemed to think
it strange that I carried Mademoiselle; but all, after hurriedly
thanking God that she was safe, hastened to ask the number of the
rioters.

"Nearly a hundred," I said. "As far as I could judge. But where is M.
le Marquis?"

"He had not returned when the alarm came."

"You are a small party?"

Louis swore with vexation. "I could get no more," he said. "News came
at the same time that Marignac's house was on fire, and he carried off
a dozen. A score of others took fright, and thought it might be the
same with them; and they saddled up in haste, and went to see. In
fact," he continued bitterly, "it seemed to me to be every one for
himself. Always excepting my good friends here."

M. de Gontaut began to chuckle, but choked for want of breath. "Beauty
in distress!" he gasped. Poor fellow, he could scarcely sit his horse.

"But you will come on to Saux?" I said. They were turning their horses
in a cloud of steam that mistily lit up the night.

"No!" Louis answered, with another oath; and I did not wonder that he
was not himself, that his usual good nature had deserted him. "It is
now or never! If we can catch them at this work----"

I did not hear the rest. The trampling of their horses, as they drove
in the spurs and started down the road, drowned the words. In a moment
they were fifty paces away; all but one, who, detaching himself at the
last moment, turned his horse's head, and rode up to me. It was the
stranger, the only one of the party, not a servant, whom I did not
know.

"How are they armed, if you please?" he asked.

"They have at least one gun," I said, looking at him curiously. "And
by this time probably more. The mass of them had pikes and
pitchforks."

"And a leader?"

"Petit Jean, the smith, of St. Alais, gave orders."

"Thank you, M. le Vicomte," he said, and saluted. Then, touching his
horse with the spur, he rode off at speed after the others.

I was in no condition to help them, and I was anxious to put
Mademoiselle, who lay in my arms like one dead, in the women's care.
The moment they were gone, therefore, we pursued our way, Father
Benit and I silent and full of thought, the others chattering to one
another without pause or stay. Mademoiselle's head lay on my right
shoulder. I could feel the faint beating of her heart; and in that
slow, dark ride had time to think of many things: of her courage and
will and firmness--this poor little convent-bred one, who a fortnight
before had not found a word to throw at me; last, but not least, of
the womanly weakness, dear to my man's heart, that had sapped her
reserve at last, and brought her arms to my neck and her cry to my
ear. The faint perfume of her hair was in my nostrils; I longed to
kiss the half-shrouded head. But, if in an hour I had learned to love
her, I had learned to honour her more; and I repressed the impulse,
and only held her more gently, and tried to think of other things
until she should be out of my arms.

If I did not find that so easy, it was not for want of food for
thought. The glow of the fire behind us reddened all the sky at our
backs; the murmur of the mob pursued us; more than once, as we went, a
figure sneaked by us in the blackness, and fled, as if to join them.
Father Benit fancied that there was a second fire a league to the
east; and in the tumult and upheaval of all things on this night, and
the consequent confusion of thought into which I had fallen, it would
scarcely have surprised me if flames had broken out before us also,
and announced that Saux was burning.

But I was spared that. On the contrary, the whole village came out to
meet us, and accompanied us, cheering, from the gates to the door of
the Chteau, where, in the glare of the lights they carried, and amid
a great silence of curiosity and expectation, Mademoiselle was lifted
from my saddle and carried into the house. The women who pressed round
the door to see, stooped forward to follow her with their eyes; but
none as I followed her.

                          *   *   *   *   *

Much that passes for fair at night wears a foul look by day; and
things tolerable in the suffering have a knack of seeming
fantastically impossible in the retrospect. When I awoke next morning,
in the great chair in the hall--wherein, tradition had it, Louis the
Thirteenth had once sat--and, after three hours of troubled sleep,
found Andr standing over me, and the sun pouring in through door and
window, I fancied for a moment that the events of the night, as I
remembered them, were a dream. Then my eyes fell on a brace of
pistols, which I had placed by my side over night, and on the tray at
which Father Benit and I had refreshed ourselves; and I knew that the
things had happened. I sprang up.

"Is M. de St. Alais here?" I said.

"No, Monsieur."

"Nor M. le Comte?"

"No, Monsieur."

"What!" I said. "Have none of the party come?" For I had gone to sleep
expecting to be called up to receive them within the hour.

"No, M. le Vicomte," the old man answered, "except--except one
gentleman who was with them, and who is now walking with M. le Cur in
the garden. And for him----"

"Well?" I said sharply, for Andr, who had got on his most gloomy and
dogmatic air, stopped with a sniff of contempt.

"He does not seem to be a man for whom M. le Vicomte should be
roused," he answered obstinately. "But M. le Cur would have it; and
in these days, I suppose, we must tramp for a smith, let alone an
officer of excise."

"Buton is here, then?"

"Yes, Monsieur; and walking on the terrace, as if of the family. I do
not know what things are coming to," Andr continued, grumbling, and
raising his voice as I started to go out, "or what they would be at.
But when M. le Vicomte took away the _carcan_ I knew what was likely
to happen. Oh! yes," he went on still more loudly, while he stood
holding the tray, and looking after me with a sour face, "I knew what
would happen! I knew what would happen!"

And, certainly, if I had not been shaken completely out of the common
rut of thought, I should have found something odd, myself, in the
combination of the three men whom I found on the terrace. They were
walking up and down, Father Benit, with downcast eyes and his hands
behind him, in the middle. On one side of him moved Buton, coarse,
heavy-shouldered, and clumsy, in his stained blouse; on the other side
paced the stranger of last night, a neat, middle-sized man, very
plainly dressed, with riding boots and a sword. Remembering that he
had formed one of Louis' party, I was surprised to see that he wore
the tricolour; but I forgot this in my anxiety to know what had become
of the others. Without standing on ceremony, I asked him.

"They attacked the rioters, lost one man, and were beaten off," he
answered with dry precision.

"And M. le Comte?"

"Was not hurt. He returned to Cahors, to raise more men. I, as my
advice seemed to be taken in ill part, came here."

He spoke in a blunt, straightforward way, as to an equal; and at once
seemed to be, and not to be, a gentleman. The Cur, seeing that he
puzzled me, hastened to introduce him.

"This, M. le Vicomte," he said, "is M. le Capitaine Hugues, late of
the American Army. He has placed his services at the disposal of the
Committee."

"For the purpose," the Captain went on, before I had made up my mind
how to take it, "of drilling and commanding a body of men to be raised
in Quercy to keep the peace. Call them militia; call them what you
like."

I was a good deal taken aback. The man, alert, active, practical, with
the butt of a pistol peeping from his pocket, was something new to me.

"You have served his Majesty?" I said at last, to gain time to think.

"No," he answered. "There are no careers in that army, unless you have
so many quarterings. I served under General Washington."

"But I saw you last night with M. de St. Alais?"

"Why not, M. le Vicomte?" he answered, looking at me plainly. "I heard
that a house was being burned. I had just arrived, and I placed myself
at M. le Comte's disposal. But they had no method, and would take no
advice."

"Well," I said, "these seem to me to be rather extreme steps. You
know----"

"M. de Marignac's house was burned last night," the Cur said softly.

"Oh!"

"And I fear that we shall hear of others. I think that we must look
matters in the face, M. le Vicomte."

"It is not a question of thinking or looking, but of doing!" the
Captain said, interrupting him harshly. "We have a long summer's day
before us, but if by to-night we have not done something, there will
be a sorry dawning in Quercy to-morrow."

"There are the King's troops," I said.

"They refuse to obey orders. Therefore, they are worse than useless."

"Their officers?"

"They are staunch; but the people hate them. A knight of St. Louis is
to the mob what a red rag is to a bull. I can answer for it that they
have enough to do to keep their men in barracks, and guard their own
heads."

I resented his familiarity, and the impatience with which he spoke;
but, resent it as I might, I could not return to the tone I had used
yesterday. Then it had seemed an outrageous thing that Buton should
stand by and listen. To-day the same thing had an ordinary air. And
this, moreover, was a different man from Doury; arguments that had
crushed the one would have no weight with the other. I saw that, and,
rather helplessly, I asked Father Benit what he would have.

He did not answer. It was the Captain who replied. "We want you to
join the Committee," he said briskly.

"I discussed that yesterday," I answered with some stiffness. "I
cannot do so. Father Benit will tell you so."

"It is not Father Benit's answer I want," the Captain replied. "It is
yours, M. le Vicomte."

"I answered yesterday," I said haughtily--"and refused."

"Yesterday is not to-day," he retorted. "M. de St. Alais' house stood
yesterday; it is a smoking ruin today. M. de Marignac's likewise.
Yesterday much was conjecture. To-day facts speak for themselves. A
few hours' hesitation, and the province will be in a blaze from one
end to the other."

I could not gainsay this; at the same time there was one other thing I
could not do, and that was change my views again. Having solemnly put
on the white cockade in Madame St. Alais' drawing-room, I had not the
courage to execute another _volte-face_. I could not recant again.

"It is impossible--impossible in my case," I stammered at last
peevishly, and in a disjointed way. "Why do you come again to me? Why
do you not go to some one else? There are two hundred others whose
names----"

"Would be of no use to us," M. le Capitaine answered brusquely;
"whereas yours would reassure the fearful, attach some moderate men to
the cause and not disgust the masses. Let me be frank with you, M. le
Vicomte," he continued in a different tone. "I want your co-operation.
I am here to take risks, but none that are unnecessary; and I prefer
that my commission should issue from above as well as from below. Add
your name to the Committee and I accept their commission. Without
doubt I could police Quercy in the name of the Third Estate, but I
would rather hang, draw, and quarter in the name of all three."

"Still, there are others----"

"You forget that I have got to rule the _canaille_ in Cahors," he
answered impatiently, "as well as these mad clowns, who think that the
end of the world is here. And those others you speak of----"

"Are not acceptable," Father Benit said gently, looking at me with
yearning in his kind eyes. The light morning air caught the skirts of
his cassock as he spoke, and lifted them from his lean figure. He held
his shovel hat in his hand, between his face and the sun. I knew that
there was a conflict in his mind as in mine, and that he would have me
and would have me not; and the knowledge strengthened me to resist his
words.

"It is impossible," I said.

"Why?"

I was spared the necessity of answering. I had my face to the door of
the house, and as the last word was spoken saw Andr issue from it
with M. de St. Alais. The manner in which the old servant cried, "M.
le Marquis de St. Alais, to see M. le Vicomte!" gave us a little
shock, it was so full of sly triumph; but nothing on M. de St. Alais'
part, as he approached, betrayed that he noticed this. He advanced
with an air perfectly gay, and saluted me with good humour. For a
moment I fancied that he did not know what had happened in the night;
his first words, however, dispelled the idea.

"M. le Vicomte," he said, addressing me with both ease and grace, "we
are for ever grateful to you. I was abroad on business last night, and
could do nothing; and my brother must, I am told, have come too late,
even if, with so small a force, he could effect anything. I saw
Mademoiselle as I passed through the house, and she gave me some
particulars."

"She has left her room?" I cried in surprise. The other three had
drawn back a little, so that we enjoyed a kind of privacy.

"Yes," he answered, smiling slightly at my tone. "And I can assure
you, M. le Vicomte, has spoken as highly of you as a maiden dare. For
the rest, my mother will convey the thanks of the family to you more
fitly than I can. Still, I may hope that you are none the worse."

I muttered that I was not; but I hardly knew what I said. St. Alais'
demeanour was so different from that which I had anticipated, his easy
calmness and gaiety were so unlike the rage and heat which seemed
natural in one who had just heard of the destruction of his house and
the murder of his steward, that I was completely nonplussed. He
appeared to be dressed with his usual care and distinction, though I
was bound to suppose that he had been up all night; and, though the
outrages at St. Alais and Marignac's had given the lie to his most
confident predictions, he betrayed no sign of vexation.

All this dazzled and confused me; yet I must say something. I muttered
a hope that Mademoiselle was not greatly shaken by her experiences.

"I think not," he said. "We St. Alais are not made of sugar. And after
a night's rest--- But I fear that I am interrupting you?" And for the
first time he let his eyes rest on my companions.

"It is to Father Benit and to Buton here, that your thanks are really
due, M. le Marquis," I said. "For without their aid----"

"That is so, is it?" he said coldly. "I had heard it."

"But not all?" I exclaimed.

"I think so," he said. Then, continuing to look at them, though he
spoke to me, he continued: "Let me tell you an apologue, M. le
Vicomte. Once upon a time there was a man who had a grudge against a
neighbour because the good man's crops were better than his. He went,
therefore, secretly and by night, and not all at once--not all at
once, Messieurs, but little by little--he let on to his neighbour's
land the stream of a river that flowed by both their farms. He
succeeded so well that presently the flood not only covered the crops,
but threatened to drown his neighbour, and after that his own crops
and himself! Apprised too late of his folly---- But how do you like
the apologue, M. le Cur?"

"It does not touch me," Father Benit answered with a wan smile.

"I am no man's servant, as the slave boasted," St. Alais answered with
a polite sneer.

"For shame! for shame, M. le Marquis!" I cried, losing patience. "I
have told you that but for M. le Cur and the smith here, Mademoiselle
and I----"

"And I have told you," he answered, interrupting me with grim good
humour, "what I think of it, M. le Vicomte! That is all."

"But you do not know what happened?" I persisted, stung to wrath by
his injustice. "You are not, you cannot be, aware that when Father
Benit and his companions arrived, Mademoiselle de St. Alais and I
were in the most desperate plight? that they saved us only at great
risk to themselves? and that for our safety at last you have to thank
rather the tricolour, which those wretches respected, than any display
of force which we were able to make."

"That, too, is so, is it?" he said, his face grown dark. "I shall have
something to say to it presently. But, first, may I ask you a
question, M. le Vicomte? Am I right in supposing that these gentlemen
are waiting on you from--pardon me if I do not get the title
correctly--the Honourable the Committee of Public Safety?"

I nodded.

"And I presume that I may congratulate them on your answer?"

"No, you may not!" I replied, with satisfaction. "This gentleman"--and
I pointed to the Capitaine Hugues--"has laid before me certain
proposals and certain arguments in favour of them."

"But he has not laid before you the most potent of all arguments," the
Captain said, interposing, with a dry bow. "I find it, and you, M. le
Vicomte, will find it, too, in M. le Marquis de St. Alais!"

The Marquis stared at him coldly. "I am obliged to you," he said
contemptuously. "By-and-by, perhaps, I shall have more to say to you.
For the present, however, I am speaking to M. le Vicomte." And he
turned and addressed me again. "These gentlemen have waited on you. Do
I understand that you have declined their proposals?"

"Absolutely!" I answered. "But," I continued warmly, "it does not
follow that I am without gratitude or natural feeling."

"Ah!" he said. Then, turning, with an easy air, "I see your servant
there," he said. "May I summon him one moment?"

"Certainly."

He raised his hand, and Andr, who was watching us from the doorway,
flew to take his orders.

He turned to me again. "Have I your permission?"

I bowed, wondering.

"Go, my friend, to Mademoiselle de St. Alais," he said. "She is in the
hall. Beg her to be so good as to honour us with her presence."

Andr went, with his most pompous air; and we remained, wondering. No
one spoke. I longed to consult Father Benit by a look, but I dared
not do so, lest the Marquis, who kept his eyes on my face, his own
wearing an enigmatical smile, should take it for a sign of weakness.
So we stood until Mademoiselle appeared in the doorway, and, after a
momentary pause, came timidly along the terrace towards us.

She wore a frock which I believe had been my mother's, and was too
long for her; but it seemed to my eyes to suit her admirably. A
kerchief covered her shoulders, and she had another laid lightly on
her unpowdered hair, which, knotted up loosely, strayed in tiny
ringlets over her neck and ears. To this charming disarray, her
blushes, as she came towards us, shading her eyes from the sun, added
the last piquancy. I had not seen her since the women lifted her from
my saddle, and, seeing her now, coming along the terrace in the fresh
morning light, I thought her divine! I wondered how I could have let
her go. An insane desire to defy her brother and whirl her off, out of
this horrid imbroglio of parties and politics, seized upon me.

But she did not look towards me, and my heart sank. She had eyes only
for M. le Marquis; approaching him as if he had a magnet which drew
her to him.

"Mademoiselle," he said gravely, "I am told that your escape last
night was due to your adoption of an emblem, which I see that you are
still wearing. It is one which no subject of his Majesty can wear with
honour. Will you oblige me by removing it?"

Pale and red by turns, she shot a piteous glance at us. "Monsieur?"
she muttered, as if she did not understand.

"I think I have spoken plainly," he said. "Be good enough to remove
it."

Wincing under the rebuke, she hesitated, looking for a moment as if
she would burst into tears. Then, with her lip trembling, and with
trembling fingers, she complied, and began to unfasten the tricolour,
which the servants--without her knowledge, it may be--had removed from
the robe she had worn to that which she now wore. It took her a long
time to remove it, under our eyes, and I grew hot with indignation.
But I dared not interfere, and the others looked on gravely.

"Thank you," M. de Alais said, when, at last, she had succeeded in
unpinning it. "I know, Mademoiselle, that you are a true St. Alais,
and would die rather than owe your life to disloyalty. Be good enough
to throw that down, and tread upon it."

She started violently at the words. I think we all did. I know that I
took a step forward, and, but for M. le Marquis' raised hand, must
have intervened. But I had no right; we were spectators, it was for
her to act. She stood a moment with all our eyes upon her, stood
staring breathless and motionless at her brother; then, still looking
at him, with a shivering sigh, she slowly and mechanically lifted her
hand, and dropped the ribbon. It fluttered down.

"Tread upon it!" the Marquis said ruthlessly.

She trembled; her face, her child's face, grown quite white. But she
did not move.

"Tread upon it!" he said again.

And then, without looking down, she moved her foot forward, and
touched the ribbon.




                             CHAPTER XI.

                            THE TWO CAMPS.


"Thank you, Mademoiselle; now you can go," he said.

But he need not have spoken, for the moment his sister had done his
bidding she turned from us; before two words had passed his lips she
was hurrying back to the house in a passion of grief, her face
covered, and her slight figure shaken by sobs that came back to us on
the summer air.

The sight stung me to rage; yet for a moment, and by a tremendous
effort I restrained myself. I would hear him out.

But he either did not, or would not see the effect he had produced.
"There, Messieurs," he said, his face somewhat pale. "I am obliged to
your patience. Now you know what I think of your tricolour and your
services. It shall shelter neither me nor mine! I hold no parley with
assassins."

I sprang forward, I could contain myself no longer. "And I!" I cried,
"I, M. le Marquis, have something to say, too! I have something to
declare! A moment ago I refused that tricolour! I rejected the
overtures of those who brought it to me. I was resolved to stand by
you and by my brethren against my better judgment. I was of your
party, though I did not believe in it; and you might have tied me to
it. But this gentleman is right, you are yourself the strongest
argument against yourself. And I do this! I do this!" I repeated
passionately. "See, M. le Marquis, and know that it is your doing!"

With the word I snatched up the ribbon, on which Mademoiselle had
trodden, and with fingers that trembled scarcely less than hers had
trembled, when she unfastened it, I pinned it on my breast.

He bowed, with a sardonic smile. "A cockade is easily changed," he
said. But I could see that he was livid with rage; that he could have
slain me for the rebuke.

"You mean," I said hotly, "that I am easily turned."

"You put on the cap, M. le Vicomte," he retorted.

The other three had withdrawn a little--not without open signs of
disgust--and left us face to face on the spot on which we had stood
three weeks before on the eve of his mother's reception. Still raging
with anger on Mademoiselle's account, and minded to wound him, I
recalled that to him, and the prophecies he had then uttered,
prophecies which had been so ill-fulfilled.

He took me up at the second word. "Ill-fulfilled?" he said grimly.
"Yes, M. le Vicomte, but why? Because those who should support me,
those who from one end of France to the other should support the King,
are like you--waverers who do not know their own minds! Because the
gentlemen of France are proving themselves churls and cravens,
unworthy of the names they bear! Yes, ill-fulfilled," he continued
bitterly, "because you, M. de Saux, and men like you, are for this
to-day, and for that to-morrow, and cry one hour, 'Reform,' and the
next, 'Order!'"

The denial stuck in my throat, and my passion dying down I could only
glower at him. He saw this, and taking advantage of my momentary
embarrassment, "But enough," he continued in a tone of dignity very
galling to me, since it was he who had behaved ill, not I. "Enough of
this. While it was possible I courted your aid, M. de Saux; and I
acknowledge, I still acknowledge, and shall be the last to disclaim,
the obligation under which you last night placed us. But there can
never be true fellowship between those who wear that"--and he pointed
to the tricolour I had assumed--"and those who serve the King as we
serve him. You will pardon me, therefore, if I take my leave, and
without delay withdraw my sister from a house in which her presence
may be misunderstood, as mine, after what has passed, must be
unwelcome."

He bowed again with that, and led the way into the house; while I
followed, tongue-tied and with a sudden chill at my heart. There was
no one in the hall except Andr, who was hovering about the farther
door; but in the avenue beyond were three or four mounted servants
waiting for M. de St. Alais, and half-way down the avenue a party of
three were riding towards the gates. It needed but a glance to show me
that the foremost of these was Mademoiselle, and that she rode low in
the saddle, as if she still wept. And I turned in a hot fit to M. de
St. Alais.

But I found his eye fixed on me in such a fashion that the words died
on my lips. He coughed drily. "Ah!" he said. "So Mademoiselle has
herself felt the propriety of leaving. You will permit me, then, to
make her acknowledgments, M. de Saux, and to take leave for her."

He saluted me with the words and turned. He already had his foot
raised to the stirrup when I muttered his name.

He looked round. "Pardon!" he said. "Is there anything----"

I beckoned to the servants to stand back. I was in misery between rage
and shame, the hot fit gone. "Monsieur," I said, "there is one more
thing to be said. This does not end all between Mademoiselle and me.
For Mademoiselle----"

"We will not speak of her!" he exclaimed.

But I was not to be put down. "For Mademoiselle, I do not know her
sentiments," I continued, doggedly disregarding his interruption, "nor
whether I am agreeable to her. But for myself, M. de St. Alais, I tell
you frankly that I love her; nor shall I change because I wear one
tricolour or another. Therefore----"

"I have only one thing to say," he cried, raising his hand to stay me.

I gave way, breathing hard. "What is it?" I said.

"That you make love like a bourgeois!" he answered, laughing
insolently. "Or a mad Englishman! And as Mademoiselle de St. Alais is
not a baker's daughter, to be wooed after that fashion, I find it
offensive. Is that enough or shall I say more, M. le Vicomte?"

"That will not be enough to turn me from my path!" I answered. "You
forget that I carried Mademoiselle hither in my arms last night. But I
do not forget it, and she will not forget it. We cannot be henceforth
as we were, M. le Marquis."

"You saved her life and base a claim upon it?" he said scornfully.
"That is generous and like a gentleman!"

"No, I do not!" I answered passionately. "But I have held Mademoiselle
in my arms, and she has laid her head on my breast, and you can undo
neither the one nor the other. Henceforth I have a right to woo her,
and I shall win her."

"While I live you never shall!" he answered fiercely. "I swear that,
as she trod on that ribbon--at my word, at my word, Monsieur!--so she
shall tread on your love. From this day seek a wife among your
friends. Mademoiselle de St. Alais is not for you."

I trembled with rage. "You know, Monsieur, that I cannot fight you!" I
said.

"Nor I you," he answered. "I know it. Therefore," he continued,
pausing an instant and reverting with marvellous ease to his former
politeness, "I will fly from you. Farewell, Monsieur--I do not say,
until we meet again; for I do not think that we shall meet much in
future."

I found nothing wherewith to answer that, and he turned and moved'
away down the avenue. Mademoiselle and her escort had disappeared; his
servants, obeying my gesture, were almost at the gates. I watched his
figure as he rode under the boughs of the walnuts, that meeting low
over his head let the sun fall on him through spare rifts; and, sore
and miserable at heart myself, I marvelled at the gallant air he
maintained, and the careless grace of his bearing.

Certainly he had force. He had the force his fellows lacked; and he
had it so abundantly, that as I gazed after him the words I had used
to him seemed weak and foolish, the resolution I had flung in his
teeth childish. After all, he was right; this, to which my feelings
had impelled me on the spur of anger and love and the moment, was no
French or proper way of wooing, nor one which I should have relished
in my sister's case. Why then had I degraded Mademoiselle by it, and
exposed myself? Men wooed mistresses that way, not wives!

So that I felt very wretched as I turned to go into the house. But
there my eye alighted on the pistols which still lay on the table in
the hall, and with a sudden revulsion of feeling I remembered that
others' affairs were out of order too; that the Chteaux of St. Alais
and Marignac lay in ashes, that last night I had saved Mademoiselle
from death, that beyond the walnut avenue with its cool, long shade
and dappled floor, beyond the quiet of this summer day, lay the
seething, brawling world of Quercy and of France--the world of
maddened peasants and frightened townsfolk, and soldiers who would not
fight, and nobles who dared not.

Then, _Vive le Tricolor!_ the die was cast. I went through the house
to find Father Benit and his companions, meaning to throw in my lot
and return with them. But the terrace was empty; they were nowhere to
be seen. Even of the servants I could only find Andr, who came
pottering to me with his lips pursed up to grumble. I asked him where
the Cur was.

"Gone, M. le Vicomte."

"And Buton?"

"He too. With half the servants, for the matter of that."

"Gone?" I exclaimed. "Whither?"

"To the village to gossip," he answered churlishly. "There is not a
turnspit now but must hear the news, and take his own leave and time
to gather it. The world is turned upside down, I think. It is time his
Majesty the King did something."

"Did not M. le Cur leave a message?"

The old servant hesitated. "Well, he did," he said grudgingly. "He
said that if M. le Vicomte would stay at home until the afternoon, he
should hear from him."

"But he was going to Cahors!" I said. "He is not returning to-day?"

"He went by the little alley to the village," Andr answered
obstinately. "I do not know anything about Cahors."

"Then go to the village now," I said, "and learn whether he took the
Cahors road."

The old man went grumbling, and I remained alone on the terrace. An
abnormal quietness, as of the afternoon, lay on the house this summer
morning. I sat down on a stone seat against the wall, and began to go
over the events of the night, recalling with the utmost vividness
things to which at the time I had scarcely given a glance, and
shuddering at horrors that in the happening had barely moved me.
Gradually my thoughts passed from these things which made my pulses
beat; and I began to busy myself with Mademoiselle. I saw her again
sitting low in the saddle and weeping as she went. The bees hummed in
the warm air, the pigeons cooed softly in the dovecot, the trees on
the lawn below me shaped themselves into an avenue over her head, and,
thinking of her, I fell asleep.

After such a night as I had spent it was not unnatural. But when I
awoke, and saw that it was high noon, I was wild with vexation. I
sprang up, and darting suspicious glances round me, caught Andr
skulking away under the house wall. I called him back, and asked him
why he had let me sleep.

"I thought that you were tired, Monsieur," he muttered, blinking in
the sun. "M. le Vicomte is not a peasant that he may not sleep when he
pleases."

"And M. le Cur? Has he not returned?"

"No, Monsieur."

"And he went--which way?"

He named a village half a league from us; and then said that my dinner
waited.

I was hungry, and for a moment asked no more, but went in and sat down
to the meal. When I rose it was nearly two o'clock. Expecting Father
Benit every moment, I bade them saddle the horses that I might be
ready to go; and then, too restless to remain still, I went into the
village. Here I found all in turmoil. Three-fourths of the inhabitants
were away at St. Alais inspecting the ruins, and those who remained
thought of nothing so little as doing their ordinary work; but,
standing in groups at their doors, or at the cross-roads, or the
church gates, were discussing events. One asked me timidly if it was
true that the King had given all the land to the peasants; another, if
there were to be any more taxes; a third, a question still more
simple. Yet with this, I met with no lack of respect; and few failed
to express their joy that I had escaped the ruffians _l-bas_. But as
I approached each group a subtle shade of expectation, of shyness and
suspicion seemed to flit across faces the most familiar to me. At the
moment I did not understand it, and even apprehended it but dimly.
Now, after the event, now that it is too late, I know that it was the
first symptom of the social poison doing its sure and deadly work.

With all this, I could hear nothing of M. le Cur; one saying that he
was here, another there, a third that he had gone to Cahors; and, in
the end, I returned to the Chteau in a state of discomfort and unrest
hard to describe. I would not again leave the front of the house lest
I should miss him; and for hours I paced the avenue, now listening at
the gates or looking up the road, now walking quickly to and fro under
the walnuts. In time evening fell, and night; and still I was here
awaiting the Cur's coming, chained to the silent house; while my mind
tortured me with pictures of what was going forward outside. The
restless demon of the time had hold of me; the thought that I lay here
idle, while the world heaved, made me miserable, filled me with shame.
When Andr came at last to summon me to supper, I swore at him; and
the moment I had done, I went up to the roof of the Chteau and
watched the night, expecting to see again a light in the sky, and the
far-off glare of burning houses.

I saw nothing, however, and the Cur did not come; and, after a
wakeful night, seven in the morning saw me in the saddle and on the
road to Cahors. Andr complained of illness and I took Gil only. The
country round St. Alais seemed to be deserted; but, half a league
farther on, over the hill, I came on a score of peasants trudging
sturdily forward. I asked them whither they were going, and why they
were not in the fields.

"We are going to Cahors, Monseigneur, for arms," they said.

"For arms! Whom are you going to fight?"

"The brigands, Monseigneur. They are burning and murdering on every
side. By the mercy of God they have not yet visited us. And to-night
we shall be armed."

"Brigands!" I said. "What brigands?"

But they could not answer that; and I left them in wonder at their
simplicity and rode on. I had not yet done with these brigands,
however. Half a league short of Cahors I passed through a hamlet where
the same idea prevailed. Here they had raised a rough barricade at the
end of the street towards the country, and I saw a man on the church
tower keeping watch. Meanwhile every one in the place who could walk
had gone to Cahors.

"Why?" I asked. "For what?"

"To hear the news."

Then I began to see that my imagination had not led me astray. All the
world was heaving, all the world was astir. Every one was hurrying to
hear and to learn and to tell; to take arms if he had never used arms
before, to advise if all his life he had obeyed orders, to do anything
and everything but his daily work. After this, that I should find
Cahors humming like a hive of bees about to swarm, and the Valandr
bridge so crowded that I could scarcely force my way through its three
gates, and the _queue_ of people waiting for rations longer, and the
rations shorter than ever before--after this, I say, all these things
seemed only natural.

Nor was I much surprised to find that as I rode through the streets,
wearing the tricolour, I was hailed here and there with cheers. On the
other hand, I noticed that wearers of white cockades were not lacking.
They kept the wall in twos and threes, and walked with raised chins,
and hands on sword-knots, and were watched askance by the commonalty.
A few of them were known to me, more were strangers; and while I
blushed under the scornful looks of the former, knowing that I must
seem to them a renegade, I wondered who the latter were. Finally I was
glad to escape from both by alighting at Doury's, over whose door a
huge tricolour flag hung limp in the sunshine.

M. le Cur de Saux? Yes, he was even then sitting with the Committee
upstairs. Would M. le Vicomte walk up?

I did so, through a press of noisy people, who thronged the stairs and
passages and lobbies, and talked, and gesticulated, and seemed to be
settled there for the day. I worked my way through these at last, the
door was opened, a fresh gust of noise came out to meet me, and I
entered the room. In it, seated round a long table, I found a score of
men, of whom some rose to meet me, while more kept their seats; three
or four were speaking at once and did not stop on my entrance. I
recognised at the farther end Father Benit and Buton, who came to
meet me, and Capitaine Hugues, who rose, but continued to speak.
Besides these there were two of the smaller noblesse, who left their
chairs, and came to me in an ecstasy, and Doury, who rose and sat down
half a dozen times; and one or two Curs and others of that rank,
known to me by sight. The uproar was great, the confusion equal to it.
Still, somehow, and after a moment of tumult, I found myself received
and welcomed and placed in a chair at the end of the table, with M. le
Capitaine on one side of me and a notary of Cahors on the other. Then,
under cover of the noise, I stole a few words with Father Benit, who
lingered a moment beside me.

"You could not join us yesterday?" he muttered, with a pathetic look
that only I understood.

"But you left a message, bidding me wait for you!" I answered.

"I did?" he said. "No; I left a message asking you to follow us--if it
pleased you."

"Then I never got it," I replied. "Andr told me----"

"Ah! Andr," he answered softly. And he shook his head.

"The rascal!" I said; "then he lied to me! And----"

But some one called the Cur to his place, and we had to part. At the
same instant most of the talkers ceased; a moment, and only two were
left speaking, who, without paying the least regard to one another,
continued to hold forth to their neighbours, haranguing, one on the
social contract; the other on the brigands--the brigands who were
everywhere burning the corn and killing the people!

At last M. le Capitaine, after long waiting to speak, attacked the
former speaker. "Tut, Monsieur!" he said. "This is not the time for
theory. A halfpennyworth of fact----

"Is worth a pound of theory!" the man of the brigands--he was a
grocer, I believe--cried eagerly; and he brought his fist down on the
table.

"But now is the time!--the God-sent time, to frame the facts to the
theory!" the other combatant screamed. "To form a perfect system! To
regenerate the world, I say! To----"

"To regenerate the fiddlestick!" his opponent answered, with equal
heat. "When brigands are at our very doors! when our crops are being
burned and our houses plundered! when----"

"Monsieur," the Captain said harshly, commanding silence by the
gravity of his tone--"if you please!"

"Yes."

"Then, to be plain, I do not believe any more in your brigands than in
M. l'Avou's theories."

This time it was the grocer's turn to scream. "What?" he cried. "When
they have been seen at Figeac, and Cajarc, and Rodez, and----

"By whom?" the soldier asked sharply, interrupting him.

"By hundreds."

"Name one."

"But it is notorious!"

"Yes, Monsieur--it is a notorious lie!" M. le Capitaine answered
bluntly. "Believe me, the brigands with whom we have to deal are
nearer home. Allow us to arrange with them first, and do not deafen M.
le Vicomte with your chattering."

"Hear! hear!" the lawyer cried.

But this insult proved too much for the man of the brigands. He began
again, and others joined in, for him and against him; to my despair,
it seemed as if the quarrel were only beginning--as if peace would
have to be made afresh.

How all this noise, tumult, and disputation, this absence of the
politeness to which I had been accustomed all my life, this vulgar
jostling and brawling depressed me I need not say. I sat deafened,
lost in the scramble; of no more account, for the moment, than Buton.
Nay of less; for while I gazed about me and listened, sunk in wonder
at my position at a table with people of a class with whom I had never
sat down before--save at the chance table of an inn, where my presence
kept all within bounds--it was Buton who, by coming to the officer's
aid, finally gained silence.

"Now you have had your say, perhaps you will let me have mine," the
Captain said, with acerbity, taking advantage of the hearing thus
gained for him. "It is very well for you, M. l'Avou, and you,
Monsieur--I have forgotten your name--you are not fighting men, and my
difficulty does not affect you. But there are half a dozen at this
table who are placed as I am, and they understand. You may organise;
but if your officers are carried off every morning, you will not go
far."

"How carried off?" the lawyer cried, puffing out his thin cheeks.
"Members of the Committee of----"

"How?" M. le Capitaine rejoined, cutting him short without
ceremony--"by the prick of a small sword! You do not understand; but,
for some of us, we cannot go three paces from this door without risk
of an insult and a challenge."

"That is true!" the two gentlemen at the foot of the table cried with
one voice.

"It is true, and more," the Captain continued, warming as he spoke.
"It is no chance work, but a plan. It is their plan for curbing us. I
have seen three men in the streets to-day, who, I can swear, are
fencing-masters in fine clothes."

"Assassins!" the lawyer cried pompously.

"That is all very well," Hugues said more soberly. "You can call them
what you please. But what is to be done? If we cannot move abroad
without a challenge and a duel, we are helpless. You will have all
your leaders picked off."

"The people will avenge you!" the lawyer said, with a grand air.

M. le Capitaine shrugged his shoulders. "Thank you for nothing," he
said.

Father Benit interposed. "At present," he said anxiously, "I think
that there is only one thing to be done. You have said, M. le
Capitaine, that some of the committee are not fighting men. Why, I
would ask, should any fight, and play into our opponents' hands?"

"_Par Dieu!_ I think that you are right!" Hugues answered frankly. And
he looked round as if to collect opinions. "Why should we? I am sure
that I do not wish to fight. I have given my proofs."

There was a short pause, during which we looked at one another
doubtfully. "Well, why not?" the Captain said at last. "This is not
play, but business. We are no longer gentlemen at large, but soldiers
under discipline."

"Yes," I said stiffly, for I found all looking at me. "But it is
difficult, M. le Capitaine, for men of honour to divest themselves of
certain ideas. If we are not to protect ourselves from insult, we sink
to the level of beasts."

"Have no fear, M. le Vicomte!" Buton cried abruptly. "The people will
not suffer it!"

"No, no; the people will not suffer it!" one or two echoed; and for a
moment the room rang with cries of indignation.

"Well, at any rate," the Captain said at last, "all are now warned.
And if, after this, they fight lightly, they do it with full knowledge
that they are playing their adversaries' game. I hope all understand
that. For my part," he continued, shrugging his shoulders with a dry
laugh, "they may cane me; I shall not fight them! I am no fool!"




                             CHAPTER XII.

                              THE DUEL.


I have said already how all this weighed me down; with what misgivings
I looked along the table, from the pale, pinched features of the
lawyer to the smug grin of the grocer, or Buton's coarse face; with
what sinkings of heart I found myself on a sudden the equal of these
men, addressed now with rude abruptness, and now with servility; last,
but not least, with what despondency I listened to the wrangling which
followed, and which it needed all the exertions of the Captain to
control. Fortunately, the sitting did not last long. After half an
hour of debate and conversation, during which I did what I could to
aid the few who knew anything of business, the meeting broke up; and
while some went out on various missions, others remained to deal with
such affairs as arose. I was one of those appointed to stay, and I
drew Father Benit into a corner, and, hiding for a moment the feeling
of despair which possessed me, I asked him if any further outbreaks
had occurred in the country round.

"No," he answered, secretly pressing my hand. "We have done so much
good, I think." Then, in a different tone, which showed how clearly he
read my mind, he continued, under his breath, "Ah! M. le Vicomte, let
us only keep the peace! Let us do what lies to our hands. Let us
protect the innocent, and then, no matter what happens. Alas, I
foresee more than I predicted. More than I dreamed of is in peril. Let
us only cling to----"

He stopped, and turned, startled by the noisy entrance of the Captain;
who came in so abruptly that those who remained at the table sprang to
their feet. M. Hugues' face was flushed, his eyes were gleaming with
anger. The lawyer, who stood nearest to the door, turned a shade
paler, and stammered out a question. But the Captain passed by him
with a glance of contempt, and came straight to me. "M. le Vicomte,"
he said out loud, blurting out his words in haste, "you are a
gentleman. You will understand me. I want your help."

I stared at him. "Willingly," I said. "But what is the matter?"

"I have been insulted!" he answered, his moustaches curling.

"How?"

"In the street! And by one of those puppies! But I will teach him
manners! I am a soldier, sir, and I----"

"But, stay, M. le Capitaine," I said, really taken aback. "I
understood that there was to be no fighting. And that you in
particular----"

"Tut! tut!"

"Would be caned before you would go out."

"_Sacr Nom!_" he cried, "what of that? Do you think that I am not a
gentleman because I have served in America instead of in France?"

"No," I said, scarcely able to restrain a smile. "But it is playing
into their hands. So you said yourself, a minute ago, and----"

"Will you help me, or will you not, sir?" he retorted angrily. And
then, as the lawyer tried to intervene, "Be silent, you!" he
continued, turning on him so violently that the scrivener jumped back
a pace. "What do you know of these things? You miserable pettifogger!
you----"

"Softly, softly, M. le Capitaine," I said, startled by this outbreak,
and by the prospect of further brawling which it disclosed. "M.
l'Avou is doing merely his duty in remonstrating. He is in the right,
and----

"I have nothing to do with him! And for you--you will not assist me?"

"I did not say that."

"Then, if you will, I crave your services at once! At once," he said
more calmly; but he still kept his shoulder to the lawyer. "I have
appointed a meeting behind the Cathedral. If you will honour me, I
must ask you to do so immediately."

I saw that it was useless to say more; that he had made up his mind;
and for answer I took up my hat. In a moment we were moving towards
the door. The lawyer, the grocer, half a dozen cried out on us, and
would have stopped us. But Father Benit remained silent, and I went
on down the stairs, and out of the house. Outside it was easy to see
that the quarrel and insult had had spectators; a gloomy crowd, not
compact, but made up of watching groups, filled all the sunny open
part of the square. The pavement, on the other hand, along which we
had to pass to go to the Cathedral, had for its only occupants a score
or more of gentlemen, who, wearing white cockades, walked up and down
in threes and fours. The crowd eyed them silently; they affected to
see nothing of the crowd. Instead, they talked and smiled carelessly,
and with half-opened eyes; swung their canes, and saluted one another,
and now and then stopped to exchange a word or a pinch of snuff. They
wore an air of insolence, ill-hidden, which the silent, almost cowed
looks of the multitude, as it watched them askance, seemed to justify.

We had to run the gauntlet of these; and my face burned with shame, as
we passed. Many of the men, whom I met now, I had met two days before
at Madame St. Alais', where they had seen me put on the white cockade;
they saw me now in the opposite camp, they knew nothing of my reasons,
and I read in their averted eyes and curling lips what they thought of
the change. Others--and they looked at me insolently, and scarcely
gave me room to pass--were strangers, wearing military swords, and the
cross of St. Louis.


Fortunately the passage was as short as it was painful. We passed
under the north wall of the Cathedral, and through a little door into
a garden, where lime trees tempered the glare of the sun, and the
town, with its crowd and noise, seemed to be in a moment left behind.
On the right rose the walls of the apse and the heavy eastern domes of
the Cathedral; in front rose the ramparts; on the left an old,
half-ruined tower of the fourteenth century lifted a frowning
ivy-covered head. In the shadow, at its foot, on a piece of smooth
sward, a group of four persons were standing waiting for us.

One was M. de St. Alais, one was Louis; the others were strangers. A
sudden thought filled me with horror. "Whom are you going to fight?" I
muttered.

"M. de St. Alais," the Captain answered, in the same tone. And then,
being within earshot of the others, I could say no more. They stepped
forward, and saluted us.

"M. le Vicomte?" Louis said. He was grave and stern. I scarcely knew
him.

I assented mechanically, and we stepped aside from the others. "This
is not a case that admits of intervention, I believe?" he said,
bowing.

"I suppose not," I answered huskily.

In truth, I could scarcely speak for horror. I was waking slowly to
the consciousness of the dilemma in which I had placed myself. Were
St. Alais to fall by the Captain's sword, what would his sister say to
me, what would she think of me, how would she ever touch my hand? And
yet could I wish ill to my own principal? Could I do so in honour,
even if something sturdy and practical, something of plain gallantry
in the man, whom I was here to second, had not already and insensibly
won my heart?

Yet one of the two must fall. The great clock above my head, slowly
telling out the hour of noon, beat the truth into my brain. For a
moment I grew dizzy; the sun dazzled me, the trees reeled before me,
the garden swam. The murmur of the crowd outside filled my ears. Then
out of the mist Louis' voice, unnaturally steady, gripped my
attention, and my brain grew clear again.

"Have you any objection to this spot?" he said. "The grass is dry, and
not slippery. They will fight in shadow, and the light is good."

"It will do," I muttered.

"Perhaps you will examine it? There is, I think, no trip or fault."

I affected to do so. "I find none," I said hoarsely.

"Then we had better place our men?"

"I think so."

I had no knowledge of the skill of either combatant, but, as I turned
to join Hugues, I was startled by the contrast which the two presented
as they stood a little apart, their upper clothes removed. The Captain
was the shorter by a head, and stiff and sturdy, with a clear eye and
keen visage. M. le Marquis, on the other hand, was tall and lithe, and
long in the arm, with a reach which threatened danger, and a smile
almost as deadly. I thought that if his skill and coolness were on a
par with his natural gifts, M. Hugues--But then again my head reeled.
What did I wish?

"We are ready," M. Louis said impatiently; and I noticed that he
glanced past me towards the gate of the garden. "Will you measure the
swords, M. le Vicomte?"

I complied, and was about to place my man, when M. le Capitaine
indicated by a sign that he wished to speak to me, and, disregarding
the frowns of the other side, I led him apart.

His face had lost the glow of passion which had animated it a few
minutes before, and was pale and stern. "This is a fool's trick," he
said curtly, and under his breath. "It will serve me right if that
puppy goes through me. You will do me a favour, M. le Vicomte?"

I muttered that I would do him any in my power.

"I borrowed a thousand francs to fit myself out for this service," he
continued, avoiding my eye, "from a man in Paris whose name you will
find in my valise at the inn. Should anything happen to me, I should
be glad if you will send him what is left. That is all."

"He shall be paid in full," I said. "I will see to it."

He wrung my hand, and went to his station; and Louis and I placed
ourselves on either side of the two, ready, with our swords drawn, to
interfere should need arise. The signal was given, the principals
saluted, and fell on guard, and in a moment the grinding and clicking
of the blades began, while the pigeons of the Cathedral flew in eddies
above us, and in the middle of the garden a little fountain tinkled
softly in the sunshine.

They had not made three passes before the great diversity of their
styles became apparent. While Hugues played vigorously with his body,
stooping, and moving, and stepping aside, but keeping his arm stiff,
and using his wrist much, M. le Marquis held his body erect and still,
but moved his arm, and, fencing with a school correctness, as if he
held a foil, disdained all artifices save those of the weapon. It was
clear that he was the better fencer, and that, of the two, the Captain
must tire first, since he was never still, and the wrist is more
quickly fatigued that the arm; but, in addition to this, I soon
perceived that the Marquis was not putting forth his full strength,
but, depending on his defence, was waiting to tire out his opponent.
My eyes grew hot, my throat dry, as I watched breathlessly, waiting
for the stroke that must finish all--waiting and flinching. And then,
on a sudden, something happened. The Captain seemed to slip, yet did
not slip, but in a moment, stooping almost prone, his left hand on the
ground, was under the other's guard. His point was at the Marquis's
breast, when the latter sprang back--sprang back, and just saved
himself. Before the Captain could recover his footing, Louis dashed
his sword aside.

"Foul play!" he cried passionately. "Foul play! A stroke _dessous!_ It
is not _en rgle_."

The Captain stood breathing quickly, his point to the ground. "But why
not, Monsieur?" he said. Then he looked to me.

"I scarcely understand, M. de St. Alais," I said stiffly. "The
stroke----"

"Is not allowed."

"In the schools," I said. "But this is a duel."

"I have never seen it used in a duel," he said.

"No matter," I answered warmly. "To interfere on such provocation is
absurd."

"Monsieur!"

"Is absurd!" I repeated firmly. "After such treatment I have no
resource but to withdraw M. le Capitaine from the field."

"Perhaps you will take his place," some one behind me said with a
sneer.

I turned sharply. One of the two persons whom we had found with St.
Alais was the speaker. I saluted him. "The surgeon?" I said.

"No," he answered angrily. "I am M. du Marc, and very much at your
service."

"But not a second," I rejoined. "And, therefore, you have no right to
be standing where you are, nor to be here. I must request you to
withdraw."

"I have at least as much right as those," he answered, pointing to the
roof of the Cathedral, over the battlements of which a number of heads
could be seen peering down at us.

I stared.

"Our friends have at least as much right as yours," he continued,
taunting me.

"But they do not interfere," I answered firmly. "Nor shall you. I
request you to withdraw."

He still refused, and even tried to bluster; but this proved too much
for Louis' stomach; he intervened sharply, and at a word from him the
bully shrugged his shoulders and moved away. Then we four looked at
one another.

"We had better proceed," the Captain said bluntly. "If the stroke was
irregular, this gentleman was right to interfere. If not----"

"I am willing," M. de St. Alais said. And in a moment the two fell on
guard, and to it again; but more fiercely now, and with less caution,
the Captain more than once using a rough, sweeping parry, in greater
favour with practical fighters than in the fencing school. This,
though it left him exposed to a _riposte_, seemed to disconcert M. le
Marquis, who fenced, I thought, less skilfully than before, and more
than once seemed to be flurried by the Captain's attack. I began to
feel doubtful of the result, my heart began to beat more quickly, the
glitter of the blades as they slid up and down one another confused my
sight. I looked for one moment across at Louis--and in that moment the
end came. M. le Capitaine used again his sweeping parry, but this time
the circle was too wide; St. Alais' blade darted serpent-like under
his. The Captain staggered back. His sword dropped from his hand.

Before he could fall I caught him in my arms, but blood was gushing
already from a wound in the side of his neck. He just turned his
eyes to my face, and tried once to speak. I caught the words, "You
will----" and then blood choked his voice, and his eyes slowly closed.
He was dead, or as good as dead, before the surgeon could reach him,
before I could lay him on the grass.

I knelt a moment beside him perfectly stunned by the suddenness of the
catastrophe; watching in a kind of fascination the surgeon feeling
pulse and heart, and striving with his thumb to stop the bleeding. For
a moment or two my world was reduced to the sinking grey face, the
quivering eyelids before me, and I saw nothing, heeded nothing,
thought of nothing else. I could not believe that the valiant spirit
had fled already; that the stout man who had so quickly yet insensibly
won my liking was in this moment dead; dead and growing livid, while
the pigeons still circled overhead, and the sparrows chirped, and the
fountain tinkled in the sunshine.

I cried out in my agony. "Not dead?" I said. "Not dead so soon?"

"Yes, M. le Vicomte, it was bad luck," the surgeon answered, letting
the passive head fall on the stained grass. "With such a wound nothing
can be done."

He rose as he spoke; but I remained on my knees, wrapt and absorbed;
staring at the glazing eyes that a few minutes before had been full of
life and keenness. Then with a shudder I turned my look on myself. His
blood covered me; it was on my breast, my arm, my hands, soaking into
my coat. From it my thoughts turned to St. Alais, and at the moment,
as I looked instinctively round to see where he was, or if he had
gone, I started. The deep boom of a heavy bell, tolled once, shook the
air; while its solemn burden still hung mournfully on the ear, quick
footsteps ran towards me, and I heard a harsh cry at my elbow. "But,
_mon Dieu!_ This is murder! They are murdering us!"

I looked behind me. The speaker was Du Marc, the bully who had vainly
tried to provoke me. The two St. Alais and the surgeon were with him,
and all four came from the direction of the door by which we had
entered. They passed me with averted eyes, and hurried towards a
little postern which flanked the old tower, and opened on the
ramparts. As they went out of sight behind a buttress that intervened
the bell boomed out again above my head, its dull note full of menace.

Then I awoke and understood; understood that the noise which filled my
ears was not the burden of the bell carried on from one deep stroke to
another, but the roar of angry voices in the square, the babel of an
approaching crowd crying: "_A la lanterne! A la lanterne!_" From the
battlements of the Cathedral, from the louvres of the domes, from
every window of the great gloomy structure that frowned above me, men
were making signs, and pointing with their hands, and brandishing
their fists--at me, I thought at first, or at the body at my feet. But
then I heard footsteps again, and I turned and found the other four
behind me, close to me; the two St. Alais pale and stern, with bright
eyes, the bully pale, too, but with a look which shot furtively here
and there, and white lips.

"Curse them, they are at that door, too!" he cried shrilly. "We are
beset. We shall be murdered. By God, we shall be murdered, and by
these _canaille!_ By these--I call all here to witness that it was a
fair fight! I call you to witness, M. le Vicomte, that----"

"It will help us much," St. Alais said with a sneer, "if he does. If I
were once at home----"

"Ay, but how are we to get there?" Du Marc cried. He could not hide
his terror. "Do you understand," he continued querulously, addressing
me, "that we shall be murdered? Is there no other door? Speak, some
one. Speak!"

His fears appealed to me in vain. I would scarcely have stirred a
finger to save him. But the sight of the two St. Alais standing there
pale and irresolute, while that roar of voices grew each moment louder
and nearer, moved me. A moment, and the mob would break in; perhaps
finding us by Hugues' side, it might in its fury sacrifice all
indifferently. It might; and then I heard, to give point to the
thought, the crash of one of the doors of the garden as it gave
way; and I cried out almost involuntarily that there was another
door--another door, if it was open. I did not look to see if they
followed, but, leaving the dead, I took the lead, and ran across the
sward towards the wall of the Cathedral.

The crowd were already pouring into the garden, but a clump of shrubs
hid us from them as we fled; and we gained unseen a little door, a
low-browed postern in the wall of the apse, that led, I knew--for not
long before I had conducted an English visitor over the Cathedral--to
a sacristy connected with the crypt. My hope of finding the door open
was slight; if I had stayed to weigh the chances I should have thought
them desperate. But to my joy as I came up to it, closely followed by
the others, it opened of itself, and a priest, showing his tonsured
head in the aperture, beckoned to us to hasten. He had little need to
do so; in a moment we had obeyed, were by his side, and panting, heard
the bolts shoot home behind us. For the moment we were safe.

Then we breathed again. We stood in the twilight of a long narrow room
with walls and roof of stone, and three loopholes for windows. Du Marc
was the first to speak. "_Mon Dieu_, that was close," he said, wiping
his brow, which in the cold light wore an ugly pallor. "We are----"

"Not out of the wood yet," the surgeon answered gravely, "though we
have good grounds for thanking M. le Vicomte. They have discovered us!
Yes, they are coming!"

Probably the people on the roof had watched us enter and denounced our
place of refuge; for as he spoke, we heard a rush of feet, the door
shook under a storm of blows, and a score of grimy savage faces showed
at the slender arrow-slits, and glaring down, howled and spat curses
upon us. Luckily the door was of oak, studded and plated with iron,
fashioned in old, rough days for such an emergency, and we stood
comparatively safe. Yet it was terrible to hear the cries of the mob,
to feel them so close, to gauge their hatred, and know while they beat
on the stone as though they would tear the walls with their naked
hands, what it would be to fall into their power!

We looked at one another, and--but it may have been the dim light--I
saw no face that was not pale. Fortunately the pause was short. The
Cur who had admitted us, unlocked as quickly as he could an inner
door. "This way," he said--but the snarling of the beasts outside
almost drowned his voice--"if you will follow me, I will let you out
by the south entrance. But, be quick, gentlemen, be quick," he
continued, pushing us out before him, "or they may guess what we are
about, and be there before us."

It may be imagined that after that we lost no time. We followed him as
quickly as we could along a narrow subterranean passage, very dimly
lit, at the end of which a flight of six steps brought us into a
second passage. We almost ran along this, and though a locked door
delayed us a moment--which seemed a minute, and a long one--the key
was found and the door opened. We passed through it, and found
ourselves in a long narrow room, the counterpart of that we had first
entered. The cur opened the farther door of this; I looked out. The
alley outside, the same which led beside the Cathedral to the Chapter
House, was empty.

"We are in time," I said, with a sigh of relief; it was pleasant to
breathe the fresh air again. And I turned, still panting with the
haste we had made, to thank the good Cur who had saved us.

M. de St. Alais, who followed me, and had kept silence throughout,
thanked him also. Then M. le Marquis stood hesitating on the
threshold, while I looked to see him hurry away. At last he turned to
me. "M. de Saux," he said, speaking with less aplomb than was usual
with him--but we were all agitated--"I should thank you also. But
perhaps the situation in which we stand towards one another----"

"I think nothing of that," I answered harshly. "But that in which we
have just stood----"

"Ah," he rejoined, shrugging his shoulders, "if you take it that
way----"

"I do take it that way," I answered--the Captain's blood was not yet
dry on the man's sword, and he spoke to me! "I do take it that way.
And I warn you, M. le Marquis," I continued sternly, "that if you
pursue your plan further, a plan that has already cost one brave man
his life, it will recoil on yourselves, and that most terribly."

"At least I shall not ask you to shield me," he answered proudly. And
he walked carelessly away, sheathing his sword as he went. The passage
was still empty. There was no one to stop him.

Louis followed him; Du Marc and the surgeon had already disappeared. I
fancied that as Louis passed me he hung a moment on his heel; and that
he would have spoken to me, would have caught my eye, would have taken
my hand, had I given him an opening. But I saw before me Hugues' dead
face and sunken eyes, and I set my own face like a stone, and turned
away.




                            CHAPTER XIII.

                            A LA LANTERNE.


For, of all the things that had happened since I left the Committee
Room, the Captain's death remained the one most real and most deeply
bitten into my mind. He had shared with me the walk from the inn to
the garden, and the petty annoyances that had then filled my thoughts.
He had faced them with me, and bravely; and this late association, and
the picture of him as he walked beside me, full of life and coarse
wrath, rose up now and cried out against his death; cried out that it
was impossible. So that it seemed horrible to me, and I shook with
fear, and loathed the man whose hand had done it.

Nor was that all. I had known Hugues barely forty-eight hours, my
liking for him was only an hour born; but I had his story. I could
follow him going about to borrow the small sum of money he had
possessed. I could trace the hopes he had built on it. I could see him
coming here full of honest courage, believing that he had found an
opening; a man strong, confident, looking forward, full of plans. And
then of all, this was the end! He had hoped, he had purposed; and on
the other side of the Cathedral, he lay stark--stark and dead on the
grass.

It seemed so sad and pitiful, I had the man so vividly in my mind,
that I scarcely gave a thought to the St. Alais' danger and escape;
that, and our hasty flight, had passed like a dream. I was content to
listen a moment beside the church door; and then satisfied that the
murmur of the crowd was dying in the distance, and that the city was
quiet, I thanked the Vicar again, and warmly, and, taking leave of
him, in my turn walked up the passage.

It was so still that it echoed my footsteps; and presently I began to
think the silence odd. I began to wonder why the mob, which a few
minutes before had shown itself so vindictive, had not found its way
round; why the neighbourhood had become on a sudden so quiet. A few
paces would show, however; I hastened on, and in a moment stood in the
market-place.

To my astonishment it lay sunny, tranquil, utterly deserted; a dog ran
here and there with tail high, nosing among the garbage; a few old
women were at the stalls on the farther side; about as many people
were busy, putting up shutters and closing shops. But the crowd which
had filled the place so short a time before, the _queue_ about the
corn measures, the white cockades, all were gone; I stood astonished.

For a moment only, however. Then, in place of the silence which had
prevailed between the high walls of the passage, a dull sound, distant
and heavy, began to speak to me; a sullen roar, as of breakers falling
on the beach. I started and listened. A moment more, and I was across
the Square, and at the door of the inn. I darted into the passage, and
up the stairs, my heart beating fast.

Here, too, I had left a crowd in the passages, and on the stairs. Not
a man remained. The house seemed to be dead; at noon-day with the sun
shining outside. I saw no one, heard no one, until I reached the door
of the room in which I had left the Committee and entered. Here, at
last, I found life; but the same silence.

Round the table were seated some dozen of the members of the
Committee. On seeing me they started, like men detected in an act of
which they were ashamed, some continuing to sit, sullen and scowling,
with their elbows on the table, others stooping to their neighbours'
ears to whisper, or listen. I noticed that many were pale and all
gloomy; and though the room was light, and hot noon poured in through
three windows, a something grim in the silence, and the air of
expectation which prevailed, struck a chill to my heart.

Father Benit was not of them, but Baton was, and the lawyer, and the
grocer, and the two gentlemen, and one of the Curs, and Doury--the
last-named pale and cringing, with fear sitting heavily on him. I
might have thought, at a first glance round, that nothing which had
happened outside was known to them; that they were ignorant alike of
the duel and the riot; but a second glance assured me that they knew
all, and more than I did; so many of them, when they had once met my
eyes, looked away.

"What has happened?" I asked, standing half-way between the door and
the long table.

"Don't you know, Monsieur?"

"No," I muttered, staring at them. Even here that distant murmur
filled the air.

"But you were at the duel, M. le Vicomte?" The speaker was Buton.

"Yes," I said nervously. "But what of that? I saw M. le Marquis safe
on his way home, and I thought that the crowd had separated. Now--"
and I paused, listening.

"You fancy that you still hear them?" he said, eying me closely and
smiling.

"Yes; I fear that they are at mischief."

"We are afraid of that, too," the smith answered drily, setting his
elbows on the table, and looking at me anew. "It is not impossible."

Then I understood. I caught Doury's eye--which would fain have escaped
mine--and read it there. The hooting of the distant crowd rose more
loudly on the summer stillness; as it did so, faces round the table
grew graver, lips grew longer, some trembled and looked down; and I
understood. "My God!" I cried in excitement, trembling myself. "Is no
one going to do anything, then? Are you going to sit here, while these
demons work their will? While houses are sacked and women and
children----"

"Why not?" Buton said curtly.

"Why not?" I cried.

"Ay, why not?" he answered sternly--and I began to see that he
dominated the others; that he would not and they dared not. "We went
about to keep the peace, and see that others kept it. But your white
cockades, your gentlemen bullies, your soldierless officers, M. le
Vicomte--I speak without offence--would not have it. They undertook to
bully us; and unless they learn a lesson now, they will bully us
again. No, Monsieur," he continued, looking round with a hard
smile--already power had changed him wondrously--"let the people have
their way for half an hour, and----"

"The people?" I cried. "Are the rascals and sweepings of the streets,
the gaol-birds, the beggars and _forats_ of the town--are they the
people?"

"No matter," he said frowning.

"But this is murder!"

Two or three shivered, and some looked sullenly from me, but the
blacksmith only shrugged his shoulders. Still I did not despair, I was
going to say more--to try threats, even prayers; but before I could
speak, the man nearest to the windows raised his hand for silence, and
we heard the distant riot sink, and in the momentary quiet which
followed the sharp report of a gun ring out, succeeded by another and
another. Then a roar of rage--distinct, articulate, full of menace.

"Oh, _mon Dieu!_" I cried, looking round, while I trembled with
indignation, "I cannot stand this! Will no one act? Will no one do
anything? There must be some authority. There must be some one to curb
this _canaille_; or presently, I warn you, I warn you all, that they
will cut your throats also; yours, M. l'Avou, and yours, Doury!"

"There was some one; and he is dead," Buton answered. The rest of the
Committee fidgeted gloomily.

"And was he the only one?"

"They've killed him," the smith said bluntly. "They must take the
consequences."

"They?" I cried, in a passion of wrath and pity. "Ay, and you! And
you! I tell you that you are using this scum of the people to crush
your enemies! But presently they will crush you too!"

Still no one spoke, no one answered me; no eyes met mine; then I saw
how it was; that nothing I could say would move them; and I turned
without another word, and I ran downstairs. I knew already, or could
guess, whither the crowd had gone, and whence came the shouting and
the shots; and the moment I reached the Square I turned in the
direction of the St. Alais' house, and ran through the streets;
through quiet streets under windows from which women looked down white
and curious, past neat green blinds of modern houses, past a few
staring groups; ran on, with all about me smiling, but always with
that murmur in my ears, and at my heart grim fear.

They were sacking the St. Alais' house! And Mademoiselle! And Madame!

The thought of them came to me late; but having come it was not to be
displaced. It gripped my heart and seemed to stop it. Had I saved
Mademoiselle only for this? Had I risked all to save her from the
frenzied peasants, only that she might fall into the more cruel hands
of these maddened wretches, these sweepings of the city?

It was a dreadful thought; for I loved her, and knew, as I ran, that I
loved her. Had I not known it I must have known it now, by the very
measure of agony which the thought of that horror caused me. The
distance from the Trois Rois to the house was barely four hundred
yards, but it seemed infinite to me. It seemed an age before I stopped
breathless and panting on the verge of the crowd, and strove to see,
across the plain of heads, what was happening in front.

A moment, and I made out enough to relieve me; and I breathed more
freely. The crowd had not yet won its will. It filled the street on
either side of the St. Alais' house from wall to wall; but in front of
the house itself, a space was still kept clear by the fire of those
within. Now and again, a man or a knot of men would spring out of the
ranks of the mob, and darting across this open space to the door,
would strive to beat it in with axes and bars, and even with naked
hands; but always there came a puff of smoke from the shuttered and
loop-holed windows, and a second and a third, and the men fell back,
or sank down on the stones, and lay bleeding in the sunshine.

It was a terrible sight. The wild beast rage of the mob, as they
watched their leaders fall, yet dared not make the rush _en masse_
which must carry the place, was enough, of itself, to appal the
stoutest. But when to this and their fiendish cries were added other
sounds as horrid--the screams of the wounded and the rattle of
musketry--for some of the mob had arms, and were firing from
neighbouring houses at the St. Alais' windows--the effect was
appalling. I do not know why, but the sunshine, and the tall white
houses which formed the street, and the very neatness of the
surroundings, seemed to aggravate the bloodshed; so that for a while
the whole, the writhing crowd, the open space with its wounded, the
ugly cries and curses and shots, seemed unreal. I, who had come
hot-foot to risk all, hesitated; if this was Cahors, if this was the
quiet town I had known all my life, things had come to a pass indeed.
If not, I was dreaming.

But this last was a thought too wild to be entertained for more than a
few seconds; and with a groan I thrust myself into the press, bent
desperately on getting through and reaching the open space; though
what I should do when I got there, or how I could help, I had not
considered. I had scarcely moved, however, when I felt my arm gripped,
and some one clinging obstinately to me, held me back. I turned to
resent the action with a blow,--I was beside myself; but the man was
Father Benit, and my hand fell. I caught hold of him with a cry of
joy, and he drew me out of the press.

His face was pale and full of grief and consternation; yet by a
wonderful chance I had found him, and I hoped. "You can do something!"
I cried in his ear, gripping his hand hard. "The Committee will not
act, and this is murder! Murder, man! Do you see?"

"What can I do?" he wailed; and he threw up his other hand with a
gesture of despair.

"Speak to them."

"Speak to them?" he answered. "Will mad dogs stand when you speak to
them? Or will mad dogs listen? How can you get to them? Where can you
speak to them? It is impossible. It is impossible, Monsieur. They
would kill their fathers to-day, if they stood between them and
vengeance."

"Then, what will you do?" I cried passionately. "What will you do?"

He shook his head; and I saw that he meant nothing, that he could do
nothing. And then my soul revolted. "You must! You shall!" I cried
fiercely. "You have raised this devil, and you must lay him! Are these
the liberties about which you have talked to us? Are these the people
for whom you have pleaded? Answer, answer me, what you will do!" I
cried. And I shook him furiously.

He covered his face with his hand. "God forgive us!" he said. "God
help us!"

I looked at him for the first and only time in my life with
contempt--with rage. "God help you?" I cried--I was beside myself.
"God helps those who help themselves! You have brought this about!
You! You! You have preached this! Now mend it!"

He trembled, and was silent. Unsupported by the passion which animated
me, in face of the brute rage of the people, his courage sank.

"Now mend it!" I repeated furiously.

"I cannot get to them," he muttered.

"Then I will make a way for you!" I answered madly, recklessly.
"Follow me! Do you hear that noise? Well, we will play a part in it!"

A dozen guns had gone off, almost in a volley. We could not see the
result, nor what was passing; but the hoarse roar of the mob
intoxicated me. I cried to him to follow, and rushed into the press.

Again he caught and stayed me, clinging to me with a stubbornness
which would not be denied. "If you will go, go through the houses! Go
through the opposite houses!" he muttered in my ear.

I had sense enough, when he had spoken twice, to understand him and
comply. I let him lead me aside, and in a moment we were out of the
press, and hurrying through an alley at the back of the houses that
faced the St. Alais' mansion. We were not the first to go that way;
some of the more active of the rioters had caught the idea before us,
and gone by this path to the windows, whence they were firing. We
found two or three of the doors open, therefore, and heard the excited
cries and curses of the men who had taken possession. However, we did
not go far. I chose the first door, and, passing quickly by a huddled,
panic-stricken group of women and children--probably the occupants of
the house--who were clustered about it, I went straight through to the
street door.

Two or three ruffianly men with smoke-grimed faces were firing through
a window on the ground floor, and one of these, looking behind him as
I passed, saw me. He called to me to stop, adding with an oath that if
I went into the street I should be shot by the aristocrats. But in my
excitement I took no heed; in a second I had the door open, and was
standing in the street--alone in the sunny, cleared space. On either
side of me, fifty paces distant, were the close ranks of the mob; in
front of me rose the white blind face of the St. Alais' house, from
which, even as I appeared, there came a little spit of smoke and the
bang of a musket.

The crowd, astonished to see me there alone and standing still, fell
silent, and I held up my hand. A gun went off above my head, and
another; and a splinter flew from one of the green shutters opposite.
Then a voice from the crowd cried out to cease firing; and for a
moment all was still. I stood in the midst of a hot breathless hush,
my hand raised. It was my opportunity--I had got it by a miracle; but
for a moment I was silent, I could find no words.

At last, as a low murmur began to make itself heard, I spoke.

"Men of Cahors!" I cried. "In the name of the Tricolour, stand!" And
trembling with agitation, acting on the impulse of the instant, I
walked slowly across the street to the door of the besieged house, and
under the eyes of all I took the Tricolour from my bosom, and hung it
on the knocker of the door. Then I turned. "I take possession," I
cried hoarsely, at the top of my voice, that all might hear, "I take
possession of this house and all that are in it in the name of the
Tricolour, and the Nation, and the Committee of Cahors. Those within
shall be tried, and justice done upon them. But for you, I call upon
you to depart, and go to your homes in peace, and the Committee----"

I got no farther. With the word a shot whizzed by my ear, and struck
the plaster from the wall; and then, as if the sound released all the
passions of the people, a roar of indignation shook the air. They
hissed and swore at me, yelled "_A la lanterne!_" and "_A bas le
tratre!_" and in an instant burst their bounds. As if invisible
floodgates gave way, the mob on either side rushed suddenly forward,
and, rolling towards the door in a solid mass, were in an instant upon
me.

I expected that I should be torn to pieces, but instead I was only
buffeted and flung aside and forgotten, and in a moment was lost in
the struggling, writhing mass of men, who flung themselves pell-mell
upon the door, and fell over one another, and wounded one another in
the fury with which they attacked it. Men, injured earlier, were
trodden under foot now; but no one stayed for their cries. Twice a gun
was fired from the house, and each shot took effect; but the press was
so great, and the fury of the assailants, as they swarmed about the
door, so blind, that those who were hit sank down unobserved, and
perished under their comrades' feet.

Thrust against the iron railings that flanked the door, I clung to
them, and protected from the pressure by a pillar of the porch,
managed with some difficulty to keep my place. I could not move,
however; I had to stand there while the crowd swayed round me, and I
waited in dizzy, sickening horror for the crisis. It came at last. The
panels of the door, riven and shattered, gave way; the foremost
assailants sprang at the gap. Yet still the frame, held by one hinge,
stood, and kept them out. As that yielded at length under their blows,
and the door fell inward with a crash, I flung myself into the stream,
and was carried into the house among the foremost, fortunately--for
several fell--on my feet.

I had the thought that I might outpace the others, and, getting first
to the rooms upstairs, might at least fight for Mademoiselle if I
could not save her. For I had caught the infection of the mob, my
blood was on fire. There was  no one in all the crowd more set to kill
than I was. I raced in, therefore, with the rest; but when I reached
the foot of the stairs I saw, and they saw, that which stopped us all.

It was M. de Gontaut, lifted, in that moment of extreme danger, above
himself. He stood alone on the stairs, looking down on the invaders,
and smiling--smiling, with everything of senility and frivolity gone
from his face, and only the courage of his caste left. He saw his
world tottering, the scum and rabble overwhelming it, everything which
he had loved, and in which he had lived, passing; he saw death waiting
for him seven steps below, and he smiled. With his slender sword
hanging at his wrist, he tapped his snuff-box and looked down at us;
no longer garrulous, feeble, almost--with his stories of stale
intrigues and his pagan creed--contemptible; but steady and proud,
with eyes that gleamed with defiance.

"Well, dogs," he said, "will you earn the gallows?"

For a second no one moved. For a second the old noble's presence and
fearlessness imposed on the vilest; and they stared at him, cowed by
his eye. Then he stirred. With a quiet gesture, as of a man saluting
before a duel, he caught up the hilt of his sword, and presented the
lower point. "Well," he said with bitter scorn in his tone, "you have
come to do it. Which of you will go to hell for the rest? For I shall
take one."

That broke the spell. With a howl, a dozen ruffians sprang up the
stairs. I saw the bright steel flash once, twice; and one reeled back,
and rolled down under his fellows' feet. Then a great bar swept up and
fell on the smiling face, and the old noble dropped without a cry or a
groan, under a storm of blows that in a moment beat the life out of
his body.

It was over in a moment, and before I could interfere. The next, a
score of men leaped over the corpse and up the stairs, with horrid
cries--I after them. To the right and left were locked doors, with
panels Wtteau-painted; they dashed these in with brutal shouts, and,
in a twinkling, flooded the splendid rooms, sweeping away, and
breaking, and flinging down in wanton mischief, everything that came
to hand--vases, statues, glasses, miniatures. With shrieks of triumph,
they filled the _salon_ that had known for generations only the graces
and beauty of life; and clattered over the shining parquets that had
been swept so long by the skirts of fair women. Everything they could
not understand was snatched up and dashed down; in a moment the great
Venetian mirrors were shattered, the pictures pierced and torn, the
books flung through the windows into the street.

I had a glimpse of the scene as I paused on the landing. But a glance
sufficed to convince me that the fugitives were not in these rooms,
and I sprang on, and up the next flight. Here, short as had been my
delay, I found others before me. As I turned the corner of the stairs
I came on three men, listening at a door; before I could reach them
one rose. "Here they are!" he cried. "That is a woman's voice! Stand
back!" And he lifted a crowbar to beat in the door.

"Hold!" I cried in a voice that shook him, and made him lower his
weapon. "Hold! In the name of the Committee, I command you to leave
that door. The rest of the house is yours. Go and plunder it."

The men glared at me. "_Sacr ventre!_" one of them hissed. "Who are
you?"

"The Committee!" I answered.

He cursed me, and raised his hand. "Stand back!" I cried furiously,
"or you shall hang!"

"Ho! ho! An aristocrat!" he retorted; and he raised his voice. "This
way, friends--this way! An aristocrat! An aristocrat!" he cried.

At the word a score of his fellows came swarming up the stairs. I saw
myself in an instant surrounded by grimy, pocked faces and scowling
eyes,--by haggard creatures sprung from the sewers of the town.
Another second and they would have laid hands on me; but desperate and
full of rage I rushed instead on the man with the bar, and, snatching
it from him before he guessed my intention, in a twinkling laid him at
my feet.

In the act, however, I lost my balance, and stumbled. Before I could
recover myself one of his comrades struck me on the head with his
wooden shoe. The blow partially stunned me; still I got to my feet
again and hit out wildly, and drove them back, and for a moment
cleared the landing round me. But I was dizzy; I saw all now through a
red haze, the figures danced before me; I could no longer think or
aim, but only hear taunts and jeers on every side. Some one plucked my
coat. I turned blindly. In a moment another struck me a crushing
blow--how, or with what, I never knew--and I fell senseless and as
good as dead.




                             CHAPTER XIV.

                             IT GOES ILL.


It was August, and the leaves of the chestnuts were still green, when
they sacked the St. Alais' house at Cahors, and I fell senseless on
the stairs. The ash trees were bare, and the oaks clad only in russet,
when I began to know things again; and, looking sideways from my
pillow into the grey autumnal world, took up afresh the task of
living. Even then many days had to elapse before I ceased to be merely
an animal--content to eat, and drink, and sleep, and take Father
Benit kneeling by my bed for one of the permanent facts of life. But
the time did come at last, in late November, when the mind awoke, as
those who watched by me had never thought to see it awake; and,
meeting the good Cur's eyes with my eyes, I saw him turn away and
break into joyful weeping.

A week from that time I knew all--the story, public and private, of
that wonderful autumn, during which I had lain like a log in my bed.
At first, avoiding topics that touched me too nearly, Father Benit
told me of Paris; of the ten weeks of suspicion and suspense which
followed the Bastille riots--weeks during which the Fauxbourgs,
scantly checked by Lafayette and his National Guards, kept jealous
watch on Versailles, where the Assembly sat in attendance on the King;
of the scarcity which prevailed through this trying time, and the
constant rumours of an attack by the Court; of the Queen's unfortunate
banquet, which proved to be the spark that fired the mine; last of
all, of the great march of the women to Versailles, on the 5th of
October, which, by forcing the King and the Assembly to Paris, and
making the King a prisoner in his own palace, put an end to this
period of uncertainty.

"And since then?" I said in feeble amazement. "This is the 20th of
November, you tell me?"

"Nothing has happened," he answered, "except signs and symptoms."

"And those?"

He shook his head gravely. "Every one is enrolled in the National
Guards--that, for one. Here in Quercy, the corps which M. Hugues took
it in hand to form numbers some thousands. Every one is armed,
therefore. Then, the game laws being abolished, every one is a
sportsman. And so many nobles have emigrated, that either there are no
nobles or all are nobles."

"But who governs?"

"The Municipalities. Or, where there are none, Committees."

I could not help smiling. "And your Committee, M. le Cur?" I said.

"I do not attend it," he answered, wincing visibly. "To be plain, they
go too fast for me. But I have worse yet to tell you!"

"What?"

"On the Fourth of August the Assembly abolished the tithes of the
Church; early in this month they proposed to confiscate the estates of
the Church! By this time it is probably done."

"What! And the clergy are to starve?" I cried in indignation.

"Not quite," he answered, smiling sadly. "They are to be paid by the
State--as long as they please the State!"

He went soon after he had told me that; and I lay in amazement,
looking through the window, and striving to picture the changed world
that existed round me. Presently Andr came in with my broth. I
thought it weak, and said so; the strong gust of outside life, which
the news had brought into my chamber, had roused my appetite, and
given me a distaste for _tisanes_ and slops.

But the old fellow took the complaint very ill. "Well," he grumbled,
"and what else is to be expected, Monsieur? With little rent paid,
and half the pigeons in the cot slaughtered, and scarcely a hare left
in the country side? With all the world shooting and snaring, and
smiths and tailors cocked up on horses--ay, and with swords by their
sides--and the gentry gone, or hiding their heads in beds, it is a
small thing if the broth is weak! If M. le Vicomte liked strong broth,
he should have been wise enough to keep the cow himself, and not----"

"Tut, tut, man!" I said, wincing in my turn. "What of Buton?"

"Monsieur means M. le Capitaine Buton?" the old man answered with a
sneer. "He is at Cahors."

"And was any one punished for--for the affair at St. Alais?"

"No one is punished now-a-days," Andr replied tartly. "Except
sometimes a miller, who is hung because corn is dear."

"Then even Petit Jean----"

"Petit Jean went to Paris. Doubtless he is now a Major or a Colonel."

With this shot the old man left me--left me writhing. For through all
I had not dared to ask the one thing I wished to know; the one thing
that, as my strength increased, had grown with it, from a vague
apprehension of evil, which the mind, when bidden do its duty, failed
to grasp, to a dreadful anxiety only too well understood and defined;
a brooding fear that weighed upon me like an evil dream, and in spite
of youth sapped my life, and retarded my recovery.

I have read that a fever sometimes burns out love; and that a man
rises cured not only of his illness, but of the passion which consumed
him, when he succumbed to it. But this was not my fate; from the
moment when that dull anxiety about I knew not what took shape and
form, and I saw on the green curtains of my bed a pale child's face--a
face that now wept and now gazed at me in sad appeal--from that moment
Mademoiselle was never out of my waking mind for an hour. God knows,
if any thought of me on her part, if any silent cry of her heart to me
in her troubles, had to do with this; but it was the case.

However, on the next day the fear and the weight were removed. I
suppose that Father Benit had made up his mind to broach the subject,
which hitherto he had shunned with care; for his first question, after
he had learned how I did, brought it up. "You have never asked what
happened after you were injured, M. le Vicomte?" he said with a little
hesitation. "Do you remember?"

"I remember all," I said with a groan.

He drew a breath of relief. I think he had feared that there was still
something amiss with the brain. "And yet you have never asked?" he
said.

"Man! cannot you understand why--why I have not asked?" I cried
hoarsely, rising, and sinking back in my seat in uncontrollable
agitation. "Cannot you understand that until I asked I had hope? But
now, torture me no longer! Tell me, tell me all, man, and then----"

"There is nothing but good to tell," he answered cheerfully,
endeavouring to dispel my fears at the first word. "You know the
worst. Poor M. de Gontaut was killed on the stairs. He was too infirm
to flee. The rest, to the meanest servant, got away over the roofs of
the neighbouring houses."

"And escaped?"

"Yes. The town was in an uproar for many hours, but they were well
hidden. I believe that they have left the country."

"You do not know where they are, then?"

"No," he answered, "I never saw any of them after the outbreak. But I
heard of them being in this or that chteau--at the Harincourts', and
elsewhere. Then the Harincourts left--about the middle of October, and
I think that M. de St. Alais and his family went with them."

I lay for a while too full of thankfulness to speak. Then, "And you
know nothing more?"

"Nothing," the Cur answered.

But that was enough for me. When he came again I was able to walk with
him on the terrace, and after that I gained strength rapidly. I
remarked, however, that as my spirits rose, with air and exercise, the
good priest's declined. His kind, sensitive face grew day by day more
sombre, his fits of silence longer. When I asked him the reason, "It
goes ill, it goes ill," he said. "And, God forgive me, I had to do
with it."

"Who had not?" I said soberly.

"But I should have foreseen!" he answered, wringing his hands openly.
"I should have known that God's first gift to man was Order. Order,
and to-day, in Cahors, there is no tribunal, or none that acts: the
old magistrates are afraid, and the old laws are spurned, and no man
can even recover a debt! Order, and the worst thing a criminal, thrown
into prison, has now to fear is that he may be forgotten. Order, and I
see arms everywhere, and men who cannot read teaching those who can,
and men who pay no taxes disposing of the money of those who do! I see
famine in the town, and the farmers and the peasants killing game or
folding their hands; for who will work when the future is uncertain? I
see the houses of the rich empty, and their servants starving; I see
all trade, all commerce, all buying and selling, except of the barest
necessaries, at an end! I see all these things, M. le Vicomte, and
shall I not say, '_Mea Culpa, Mea Culpa_'?"

"But liberty," I said feebly. "You once said yourself that a certain
price must----"

"Is liberty licence to do wrong?" he answered with passion--seldom had
I seen him so moved. "Is liberty licence to rob and blaspheme, and
move your neighbour's landmark? Does tyranny cease to be tyranny, when
the tyrants are no longer one, but a thousand? M. le Vicomte, I know
not what to do, I know not what to do," he continued. "For a little I
would go out into the world, and at all costs unsay what I have said,
undo what I have done! I would! I would indeed!"

"Something more has happened?" I said, startled by this outbreak.
"Something I have not heard?"

"The Assembly took away our tithes and our estates!" he answered
bitterly. "That you know. They denied our existence as a Church. That
you know. They have now decreed the suppression of all religious
houses. Presently they will close also our churches and cathedrals.
And we shall be pagans!"

"Impossible!" I said.

"But it is true."

"The suppression, yes. But for the churches and cathedrals----"

"Why not?" he answered despondently. "God knows there is little faith
abroad. I fear it will come. I see it coming. The greater need--that
we who believe should testify."

I did not quite understand at the time what he meant or would be at,
or what he had in his mind; but I saw that his scrupulous nature was
tormented by the thought that he had hastened the catastrophe; and I
felt uneasy when he did not appear next day at his usual time for
visiting me. On the following day he came; but was downcast and
taciturn, taking leave of me when he went with a sad kindness that
almost made me call him back. The next day again he did not appear;
nor the day after that. Then I sent for him, but too late; I sent,
only to learn from his old housekeeper that he had left home suddenly,
after arranging with a neighbouring cur to have his duties performed
for a month.

I was able by this time to go abroad a little, and I walked down to
his cottage; I could learn no more there, however, than that a
Capuchin monk had been his guest for two nights, and that M. le Cur
had left for Cahors a few hours after the monk. That was all; I
returned depressed and dissatisfied. Such villagers as I met by the
way greeted me with respect, and even with sympathy--it was the first
time I had gone into the hamlet; but the shadow of suspicion which I
had detected on their faces some months before had grown deeper and
darker with time. They no longer knew with certainty their places or
mine, their rights or mine; and shy of me and doubtful of themselves,
were glad to part from me.

Near the gates of the avenue I met a man whom I knew; a wine-dealer
from Aulnoy. I stayed to ask him if the family were at home.

He looked at me in surprise. "No, M. le Vicomte," he said. "They left
the country some weeks ago--after the King was persuaded to go to
Paris."

"And M. le Baron?"

"He too."

"For Paris?"

The man, a respectable bourgeois, grinned at me. "No, Monsieur, I
fancy not," he said. "You know best, M. le Vicomte; but if I said
Turin, I doubt I should be little out."

"I have been ill," I said. "And have heard nothing."

"You should go into Cahors," he answered; with rough good-nature.
"Most of the gentry are there--if they have not gone farther. It is
safer than the country in these days. Ah, if my father had lived to
see----"

He did not finish the sentence in words, but raised his eyebrows and
shoulders, saluted me, and rode away. In spite of his surprise it was
easy to see that the change pleased him, though he veiled his
satisfaction out of civility.

I walked home feeling lonely and depressed. The tall stone house, the
seigneurial tower and turret and dovecot, stripped of the veil of
foliage that in summer softened their outlines, stood up bare and
gaunt at the end of the avenue; and seemed in some strange way to
share my loneliness and to speak to me of evil days on which we had
alike fallen. In losing Father Benit I had lost my only chance of
society just when, with returning strength, the desire for
companionship and a more active life was awakening. I thought of this
gloomily; and then was delighted to see, as I approached the door, a
horse tethered to the ring beside it. There were holsters on the
saddle, and the girths were splashed.

Andr was in the hall, but to my surprise, instead of informing me
that there was a visitor, he went on dusting a table, with his back to
me.

"Who is here?" I said sharply.

"No one," he answered.

"No one? Then whose is that horse?"

"The smith's, Monsieur."

"What? Buton's?"

"Ay, Buton's! It is a new thing hanging it at the front door," he
added, with a sneer.

"But what is he doing? Where is he?"

"He is where he ought to be; and that is at the stables," the old
fellow answered doggedly. "I'll be bound that it is the first piece of
honest work he has done for many a day."

"Is he shoeing?"

"Why not? Does Monsieur want him to dine with him?" was the
ill-tempered retort.

I took no notice of this, but went to the stables. I could hear the
bellows heaving; and turning the corner of the building I came on
Buton at work in the forge with two of his men. The smith was stripped
to his shirt, and with his great leather apron round him, and his
bare, blackened arms, looked like the Buton of six months ago. But
outside the forge lay a little heap of clothes neatly folded, a blue
coat with red facings, a long blue waistcoat, and a hat with a huge
tricolour; and as he released the horse's hoof on which he was at
work, and straightened himself to salute me, he looked at me with a
new look, that was something between appeal and defiance.

"Tut, tut!" I said, fleering at him. "This is too great an honour, M.
le Capitaine! To be shod by a member of the Committee!"

"Has M. le Vicomte anything of which to complain?" he said, reddening
under the deep tan of his face.

"I? No, indeed. I am only overwhelmed by the honour you do me."

"I have been here to shoe once a month," he persisted stubbornly.
"Does Monsieur complain that the horses have suffered?"

"No. But----"

"Has M. le Vicomte's house suffered? Has so much as a stack of his
corn been burned, or a colt taken from the fields, or an egg from the
nest?"

"No," I said.

Buton nodded gloomily. "Then if Monsieur has no fault to find," he
replied, "perhaps he will let me finish my work. Afterwards I will
deliver a message I have for him. But it is for his ear, and the
forge----"

"Is not the place for secrets, though the smith is the man!" I
answered, with a parting gibe, fired over my shoulders. "Well, come to
me on the terrace when you have finished."

He came an hour later, looking hugely clumsy in his fine clothes; and
with a sword--heaven save us!--a sword by his side. Presently the
murder came out; he was the bearer of a commission appointing me
Lieutenant-Colonel in the National Guard of the Province. "It was
given at my request," he said, with awkward pride. "There were some,
M. le Vicomte, who thought that you had not behaved altogether well in
the matter of the riot, but I rattled their heads together. Besides I
said, 'No Lieutenant-Colonel, no Captain!' and they cannot do without
me. I keep this side quiet."

What a position it was! Ah, what a position it was! And how for a
moment the absurdity of it warred in my mind with the humiliation! Six
months before I should have torn up the paper in a fury, and flung it
in his face, and beaten him out of my presence with my cane. But much
had happened since then; even the temptation to break into laughter,
into peal upon peal of gloomy merriment, was not now invincible. I
overcame it by an effort, partly out of prudence, partly from a
better motive--a sense of the man's rough fidelity amid circumstances,
and in face of anomalies, the most trying. I thanked him instead,
therefore--though I almost choked; and I said I would write to the
Committee.

Still he lingered, rubbing one great foot against another; and I
waited with mock politeness to hear his business. At length, "There is
another thing I wish to say, M. le Vicomte," he growled. "M. le Cur
has left Saux."

"Yes?"

"Well, he is a good man; or he was a good man," he continued
grudgingly. "But he is running into trouble, and you would do well to
let him know that."

"Why?" I said. "Do you know where he is?"

"I can guess," he answered. "And where others are, too; and where
there will presently be trouble. These Capuchin monks are not about
the country for nothing. When the crows fly home there will be
trouble. And I do not want him to be in it."

"I have not the least idea where he is," I said coldly. "Nor what you
mean." The smith's tone had changed and grown savage and churlish.

"He has gone to Nmes," he answered.

"To Nmes?" I cried in astonishment. "How do you know? It is more than
I know."

"I do know," he answered. "And what is brewing there. And so do a
great many more. But this time the St. Alais and their bullies, M. le
Vicomte--ay, they are all there--will not escape us. We will break
their necks. Yes, M. le Vicomte, make no mistake," he continued,
glaring at me, his eyes red with suspicion and anger, "mix yourselves
up with none of this. We are the people! The people! Woe to the man or
thing that stands in our way!"

"Go!" I said. "I have heard enough. Begone!"

He looked at me a moment as if he would answer me. But old habits
overcame him, and with a sullen word of farewell he turned, and went
round the house. A minute later I heard his horse trot down the
avenue.

I had cut him short; nevertheless the instant he was gone I wished him
back, that I might ask him more. The St. Alais at Nmes? Father Benit
at Nmes? And a plot brewing there in which all had a hand? In a
moment the news opened a window, as it were, into a wider world,
through which I looked, and no longer felt myself shut in by the
lonely country round me and the lack of society. I looked and saw the
great white dusty city of the south, and trouble rising in it, and in
the middle of the trouble, looking at me wistfully, Denise de St.
Alais.

Father Benit had gone thither. Why might not I?

I walked up and down in a flutter of spirits, and the longer I
considered it, the more I liked it; the longer I thought of the dull
inaction in which I must spend my time at home, unless I consented to
rub shoulders with Buton and his like, the more taken I was with the
idea of leaving.

And after all why not? Why should I not go?

I had my commission in my pocket, wherein I was not only appointed to
the National Guards, but described as _ci-devant_ "President of the
Council of Public Safety in the Province of Quercy"; and this taking
the place of papers or passport would render travelling easy. My long
illness would serve as an excuse for a change of air; and explain my
absence from home; I had in the house as much money as I needed. In a
word, I could see no difficulty, and nothing to hinder me, if I chose
to go. I had only to please myself.

So the choice was soon made. The following day I mounted a horse for
the first time, and rode two-thirds of a league on the road, and home
again very tired.

Next morning I rode to St. Alais, and viewed the ruins of the house
and returned; this time I was less fatigued.

Then on the following day, Sunday, I rested; and on the Monday I rode
half-way to Cahors and back again. That evening I cleaned my pistols
and overlooked Gil while he packed my saddle-bags, choosing two plain
suits, one to pack and one to wear, and a hat with a small tricolour
rosette. On the following morning, the 6th of March, I took the road;
and parting from Andr on the outskirts of the village, turned my
horse's head towards Figeac with a sense of freedom, of escape from
difficulties and embarrassments, of hope and anticipation, that made
that first hour delicious; and that still supported me when the March
day began to give place to the chill darkness of evening--evening that
in an unknown, untried place is always sombre and melancholy.




                             CHAPTER XV.

                              AT MILHAU.


I met with many strange things on that journey. I found it strange to
see, as I went, armed peasants in the fields; to light in each village
on men drilling; to enter inns and find half a dozen rustics seated
round a table with glasses and wine, and perhaps an inkpot before
them, and to learn that they called themselves a Committee. But
towards evening of the third day I saw a stranger thing than any of
these. I was beginning to mount the valley of the Tarn which runs up
into the Cevennes at Milhau; a north wind was blowing, the sky was
overcast, the landscape grey and bare; a league before me masses of
mountain stood up gloomily blue. On a sudden, as I walked wearily
beside my horse, I heard voices singing in chorus; and looked about
me. The sound, clear and sweet as fairy's music, seemed to rise from
the earth at my feet.

A few yards farther, and the mystery explained itself. I found myself
on the verge of a little dip in the ground, and saw below me the roofs
of a hamlet, and on the hither side of it a crowd of a hundred or
more, men and women. They were dancing and singing round a great tree,
leafless, but decked with flags: a few old people sat about the roots
inside the circle, and but for the cold weather and the bleak outlook,
I might have thought that I had come on a May-day festival.

My appearance checked the singing for a moment; then two elderly
peasants made their way through the ring and came to meet me, walking
hand in hand. "Welcome to Vlais and Giron!" cried one. "Welcome to
Giron and Vlais!" cried the other. And then, before I could answer,
"You come on a happy day," cried both together.

I could not help smiling. "I am glad of that," I said. "May I ask what
is the reason of your meeting?"

"The Communes of Giron and Vlais, of Vlais and Giron," they answered,
speaking alternately, "are today one. To-day, Monsieur, old boundaries
disappear; old feuds die. The noble heart of Giron, the noble heart of
Vlais, beat as one."

I could scarcely refrain from laughing at their simplicity;
fortunately, at that moment, the circle round the tree resumed their
song and dance, which had even in that weather a pretty effect, as of
a Watteau _fte_. I congratulated the two peasants on the sight.

"But, Monsieur, this is nothing," one of them answered with perfect
gravity. "It is not only that the boundaries of communes are
disappearing; those of provinces are of the past also. At Valence,
beyond the mountains, the two banks of the Rhone have clasped hands
and sworn eternal amity. Henceforth all Frenchmen are brothers; all
Frenchmen are of all provinces!"

"That is a fine idea," I said.

"No son of France will again shed French blood!" he continued.

"So be it."

"Catholic and Protestant, Protestant and Catholic will live at peace!
There will be no law-suits. Grain will circulate freely, unchecked by
toils or dues. All will be free, Monsieur. All will be rich."

They said more in the same sanguine simple tone, and with the same
nave confidence; but my thoughts strayed from them, attracted by a
man, who, seated among the peasants at the foot of the tree, seemed to
my eyes to be of another class. Tall and lean, with lank black hair,
and features of a stern, sour cast, he had nothing of outward show to
distinguish him from those round him. His dress, a rough hunting suit,
was old and patched; the spurs on his brown, mud-stained boots were
rusty and bent. Yet his carriage possessed an ease the others lacked;
and in the way he watched the circling rustics I read a quiet scorn.

I did not notice that he heeded or returned my gaze, but I had not
gone on my way a hundred paces, after taking leave of the two mayors
and the revellers, before I heard a step, and looking round, saw the
stranger coming after me. He beckoned, and I waited until he overtook
me.

"You are going to Milhau?" he said, speaking abruptly, and with a
strong country accent; yet in the tone of one addressing an equal.

"Yes, Monsieur," I said. "But I doubt if I shall reach the town
to-night."

"I am going also," he answered. "My horse is in the village."

And without saying more he walked beside me until we reached the
hamlet. There--the place was deserted--he brought from an outhouse a
sorry mare, and mounted. "What do you think of that rubbish?" he said
suddenly as we took the road again. I had watched his proceedings in
silence.

"I fear that they expect too much," I answered guardedly.

He laughed; a horse-laugh full of scorn. "They think that the
millennium has come," he said. "And in a month they will find their
barns burned and their throats cut."

"I hope not," I said.

"Oh, I hope not," he answered cynically. "I hope not, of course. But
even so _Vive la Nation! Vive la Revolution!_"

"What? If that be its fruit?" I asked.

"Ay, why not?" he answered, his gloomy eyes fixed on me. "It is every
one for himself, and what has the old rule done for me that I should
fear to try the new? Left me to starve on an old rock and a dovecot;
sheltered by bare stones, and eating out of a black pot! While women
and bankers, scented fops and lazy priests prick it before the King!
And why? Because I remain, sir, what half the nation once were."

"A Protestant?" I hazarded.

"Yes, Monsieur. And a poor noble," he answered bitterly. "The Baron de
Gol, at your service."

I gave him my name in return.

"You wear the tricolour," he said; "yet you think me extreme? I
answer, that that is all very well for you; but we are different
people. You are doubtless a family man, M. le Vicomte, with a
wife----"

"On the contrary, M. le Baron."

"Then a mother, a sister?"

"No," I said, smiling. "I have neither. I am quite alone."

"At least with a home," he persisted, "means, friends, employment, or
the chance of employment?"

"Yes," I said, "that is so."

"Whereas I--I," he answered, growing guttural in his excitement,
"have none of these things. I cannot enter the army--I am a
Protestant! I am shut off from the service of the State--I am a
Protestant! I cannot be a lawyer or a judge--I am a Protestant! The
King's schools are closed to me--I am a Protestant! I cannot appear at
Court--I am a Protestant! I--in the eyes of the law I do not exist!
I--I, Monsieur," he continued more slowly, and with an air not devoid
of dignity, "whose ancestors stood before Kings, and whose
grandfather's great-grandfather saved the fourth Henry's life at
Coutras--I do not exist!"

"But now?" I said, startled by his tone of passion.

"Ay, now," he answered grimly, "it is going to be different. Now, it
is going to be otherwise, unless these black crows of priests put the
clock back again. That is why I am on the road."

"You are going to Milhau?"

"I live near Milhau," he answered. "And I have been from home. But I
am not going home now. I am going farther--to Nmes."

"To Nmes?" I said in surprise.

"Yes," he said. And he looked at me askance and a trifle grimly, and
did not say any more. By this time it was growing dark; the valley of
the Tarn, along which our road lay, though fertile and pleasant to the
eye in summer, wore at this season, and in the half-light, a savage
and rugged aspect. Mountains towered on either side; and sometimes,
where the road drew near the river, the rushing of the water as it
swirled and eddied among the rocks below us, added its note of
melancholy to the scene. I shivered. The uncertainty of my quest, the
uncertainty of everything, the gloom of my companion, pressed upon me.
I was glad when he roused himself from his brooding, and pointed to
the lights of Milhau glimmering here and there on a little plain,
where the mountains recede from the river.

"You are doubtless going to the inn?" he said, as we entered the
outskirts. I assented. "Then we part here," he continued. "To-morrow,
if you are going to Nmes---- But you may prefer to travel alone."

"Far from it," I said.

"Well, I shall be leaving the east gate--about eight o'clock," he
answered grudgingly. "Good-night, Monsieur."

I bade him good-night, and leaving him there, rode into the town:
passing through narrow, mean streets, and under dark archways and
hanging lanterns, that swung and creaked in the wind, and did
everything but light the squalid obscurity. Though night had fallen,
people were moving briskly to and fro, or standing at their doors; the
place, after the solitude through which I had ridden, had the air of a
city; and presently I became aware that a little crowd was following
my horse. Before I reached the inn, which stood in a dimly-lit square,
the crowd had grown into a great one, and was beginning to press upon
me; some who marched nearest to me staring up inquisitively into my
face, while others, farther off, called to their neighbours, or to dim
forms seen at basement windows, that it was he!

I found this somewhat alarming. Still they did not molest me; but when
I halted they halted too, and I was forced to dismount almost in their
arms. "Is this the inn?" I said to those nearest tome; striving to
appear at my ease.

"Yes! yes!" they cried with one voice, "that is the inn!"

"My horse----"

"We will take the horse! Enter! Enter!"

I had little choice, they flocked so closely round me; and, affecting
carelessness, I complied, thinking that they would not follow, and
that inside I should learn the meaning of their conduct. But the
moment my back was turned they pressed in after me and beside me, and,
almost sweeping me off my feet, urged me along the narrow passage of
the house, whether I would or no. I tried to turn and remonstrate; but
the foremost drowned my words in loud cries for "M. Flandre! M.
Flandre!"

Fortunately the person addressed was not far off. A door towards which
I was being urged opened, and he appeared. He proved to be an
immensely stout man, with a face to match his body; and he gazed at us
for a moment, astounded by the invasion. Then he asked angrily what
was the matter. "_Ventre de Ciel!_" he cried. "Is this my house or
yours, rascals? Who is this?"

"The Capuchin! The Capuchin!" cried a dozen voices.

"Ho! ho!" he answered, before I could speak. "Bring a light."

Two or three bare-armed women whom the noise had brought to the door
of the kitchen fetched candles, and raising them above their heads
gazed at me curiously. "Ho! ho!" he said again. "The Capuchin is it?
So you have got him."

"Do I look like one?" I cried angrily, thrusting back those who
pressed on me most closely. "_Nom de Dieu!_ Is this the way you
receive guests, Monsieur? Or is the town gone mad?"

"You are not the Capuchin monk?" he said, somewhat taken aback, I
could see, by my boldness.

"Have I not said that I am not? Do monks in your country travel in
boots and spurs?" I retorted.

"Then your papers!" he answered curtly. "Your papers! I would have you
to know," he continued, puffing out his cheeks, "that I am Mayor here
as well as host, and I keep the jail as well as the inn. Your papers,
Monsieur, if you prefer the one to the other."

"Before your friends here?" I said contemptuously.

"They are good citizens," he answered.

I had some fear, now I had come to the pinch, that the commission I
carried might fail to produce all the effects with which I had
credited it. But I had no choice, and ultimately nothing to dread; and
after a momentary hesitation I produced it. Fortunately it was drawn
in complimentary terms and gave the Mayor, I know not how, the idea
that I was actually bound at the moment on an errand of state. When he
had read it, therefore, he broke into a hundred apologies, craved
leave to salute me, and announced to the listening crowd that they had
made a mistake.

It struck me at the time as strange, that they, the crowd, were not at
all embarrassed by their error. On the contrary, they hastened to
congratulate me on my acquittal, and even patted me on the shoulder in
their good humour; some went to see that my horse was brought in, or
to give orders on my behalf, and the rest presently dispersed, leaving
me fain to believe that they would have hung me to the nearest
_lanterne_ with the same stolid complaisance.

When only two or three remained, I asked the Mayor for whom they had
taken me.

"A disguised monk, M. le Vicomte," he said. "A very dangerous fellow,
who is known to be travelling with two ladies--all to Nmes; and
orders have been sent from a high quarter to arrest him."

"But I am alone!" I protested. "I have no ladies with me."

He shrugged his shoulders. "Just so, M. le Vicomte," he answered. "But
we have got the two ladies. They were arrested this morning, while
attempting to pass through the town in a carriage. We know, therefore,
that he is now alone."

"Oh," I said. "So now you only want him? And what is the charge
against him?" I continued, remembering with a languid stirring of the
pulses that a Capuchin monk had visited Father Benit before his
departure. It seemed to be strange that I should come upon the traces
of another here.

"He is charged," M. Flandre answered pompously, "with high treason
against the nation, Monsieur. He has been seen here, there, and
everywhere, at Montpellier, and Cette, and Albi, and as far away as
Auch; and always preaching war and superstition, and corrupting the
people."

"And the ladies?" I said smiling. "Have they too been corrupting----"

"No, M. le Vicomte. But it is believed that wishing to return to
Nmes, and learning that the roads were watched, he disguised himself
and joined himself to them. Doubtless they are _dvotes_."

"Poor things!" I said, with a shudder of compassion; every one seemed
to be so good-tempered, and yet so hard. "What will you do with them?"

"I shall send for orders," he answered. "In his case," he continued
airily, "I should not need them. But here is your supper. Pardon me,
M. le Vicomte, if I do not attend on you myself. As Mayor I have to
take care that I do not compromise--but you understand?"

I said civilly that I did; and supper being laid, as was then the
custom in the smaller inns, in my bedroom, I asked him to take a glass
of wine with me, and over the meal learned much of the state of the
country, and the fermentation that was at work along the southern
seaboard, the priests stirring up the people with processions and
sermons. He waxed especially eloquent upon the excitement at Nmes,
where the masses were bigoted Romanists, while the Protestants had a
following, too, with the hardy peasants of the mountains behind them.
"There will be trouble, M. le Vicomte, there will be trouble there,"
he said with meaning. "Things are going too well for the people _la
bas_. They will stop them if they can."

"And this man?"

"Is one of their missionaries."

I thought of Father Benit, and sighed. "By the way," the Mayor said
abruptly, gazing at me in moony thoughtfulness, "that is curious now!"

"What?" I said.

"You come from Cahors, M. le Vicomte?"

"Well?"

"So do these women; or they say they do. The prisoners."

"From Cahors?"

"Yes. It is odd now," he continued, rubbing his chin, "but when I read
your commission I did not think of that."

I shrugged my shoulders impatiently. "It does not follow that I am in
the plot," I said. "For goodness sake, M. le Maire, do not let us open
the case again. You have seen my papers, and----"

"Tut! tut!" he said. "That is not my meaning. But you may know these
persons."

"Oh!" I said; and then I sat a moment, staring at him between the
candles, my hand raised, a morsel on my fork. A wild extravagant
thought had flashed into my mind. Two ladies from Cahors? From Cahors,
of all places? "How do they call themselves?" I asked.

"Corvas," he answered.

"Oh! Corvas," I said, falling to eating again, and putting the morsel
into my mouth. And I went on with my supper.

"Yes. A merchant's wife, she says she is. But you shall see her."

"I don't remember the name," I answered.

"Still, you may know them," he rejoined, with the dull persistence of
a man of few ideas. "It is just possible that we have made a mistake,
for we found no papers in the carriage, and only one thing that seemed
suspicious."

"What was that?"

"A red cockade."

"A _red_ cockade?"

"Yes," he answered. "The badge of the old Leaguers, you know."

"But," I said, "I have not heard of any party adopting that."

He rubbed his bald head a little doubtfully. "No," he said, "that is
true. Still, it is a colour we don't like here. And two ladies
travelling alone--alone, Monsieur! Then their driver, a half-witted
fellow, who said that they had engaged him at Rodez, though he denied
stoutly that he had seen the Capuchin, told two or three tales.
However, if you will eat no more, M. le Vicomte, I will take you to
see them. You may be able to speak for or against them."

"If you do not think that it is too late?" I said, shrinking somewhat
from the interview.

"Prisoners must not be choosers," he answered, with an unpleasant
chuckle. And he called from the door for a lantern and his cloak.

"The ladies are not here, then?" I said.

"No," he answered, with a wink. "Safe bind, safe find! But they have
nothing to cry about. There are one or two rough fellows in the clink,
so Babet, the jailer, has given them room in his house."

At this moment the lantern came, and the Mayor having wrapped his
portly person in a cloak, we passed out of the house. The square
outside was utterly dark, such lights as had been burning when I
arrived had been extinguished, perhaps by the wind, which was rising,
and now blew keenly across the open space. The yellow glare of the
lantern was necessary, but though it showed us a few feet of the
roadway, and enabled us to pick our steps, it redoubled the darkness
beyond; I could not see even the line of the roofs, and had no idea in
what direction we had gone or how far, when M. Flandre halted
abruptly, and, raising the lantern, threw its light on a greasy stone
wall, from which, set deep in the stone-work, a low iron-studded door
frowned on us. About the middle of the door hung a huge knocker, and
above it was a small _grille_.

"Safe bind, safe find!" the Mayor said again with a fat chuckle; but,
instead of raising the knocker, he drew his stick sharply across the
bars of the _grille_.

The summons was understood and quickly answered. A face peered a
moment through the grating; then the door opened to us. The Mayor took
the lead, and we passed in, out of the night, into a close, warm air
reeking of onions and foul tobacco, and a hundred like odours. The
jailer silently locked the door behind us, and, taking the Mayor's
lantern from him, led the way down a grimy, low-roofed passage barely
wide enough for one man. He halted at the first door on the left of
the passage, and threw it open.

M. Flandre entered first, and, standing while he removed his hat, for
an instant filled the doorway. I had time to hear and note a burst of
obscene singing, which came from a room farther down the passage; and
the frequent baying of a prison-dog, that, hearing us, flung itself
against its chain, somewhere in the same direction. I noted, too, that
the walls of the passage in which I stood were dingy and trickling
with moisture, and then a voice, speaking in answer to M. Flandre's
salutation, caught my ear and held me motionless.

The voice was Madame's--Madame de St. Alais'!

It was fortunate that I had entertained, though but a second, the
wild, extravagant thought that had occurred to me at supper; for in a
measure it had prepared me. And I had little time for other
preparation, for thought, or decision. Luckily the room was thick with
vile tobacco smoke, and the steam from linen drying by the fire; and I
took advantage of a fit of coughing, partly assumed, to linger an
instant on the threshold after M. Flandre had gone in. Then I followed
him.

There were four people in the room besides the Mayor, but I had no
eyes for the frowsy man and woman who sat playing with a filthy pack
of cards at a table in the middle of the floor. I had only eyes for
Madame and Mademoiselle, and them I devoured. They sat on two stools
on the farther side of the hearth; the girl with her head laid wearily
back against the wall, and her eyes half-closed; the mother, erect and
watchful, meeting the Mayor's look with a smile of contempt. Neither
the prison-house, nor danger, nor the companionship of this squalid
hole had had power to reduce her fine spirit; but as her eyes passed
from the Mayor and encountered mine, she started to her feet with a
gasping cry, and stood staring at me.

It was not wonderful that for a second, peering through the reek, she
doubted. But one there was there who did not doubt. Mademoiselle had
sprung up in alarm at the sound of her mother's cry, and for the
briefest moment we looked at one another. Then she sank back on her
stool, and I heard her break into violent crying.

"Hallo!" said the Mayor. "What is this?"

"A mistake, I fear," I said hoarsely, in words I had already composed.
"I am thankful, Madame," I continued, bowing to her with distant
ceremony, and as much indifference as I could assume, "that I am so
fortunate as to be here."

She muttered something and leaned against the wall. She had not yet
recovered herself.

"You know the ladies?" the Mayor said, turning to me and speaking
roughly; even with a tinge of suspicion in his voice. And he looked
from one to the other of us sharply.

"Perfectly," I said.

"They are from Cahors?"

"From that neighbourhood."

"But," he said, "I told you their names, and you said that you did not
know them, M. le Vicomte?"

For a moment I held my breath; gazing into Madame's face and reading
there anxiety, and something more--a sudden terror. I took the leap--I
could do nothing else. "You told me Corvas--that the lady's name was
Corvas," I muttered.

"Yes," he said.

"But Madame's name is Corras."

"Corras?" he repeated, his jaw falling.

"Yes, Corras. I dare say that the ladies," I continued with assumed
politeness, "did not in their fright speak very clearly."

"And their name is Corras?"

"I told you that it was," Madame answered, speaking for the first
time, "and also that I knew nothing of your Capuchin monk. And this
last," she continued earnestly, her eyes fixed on mine in passionate
appeal--in appeal that this time could not be mistaken--"I say again,
on my honour!"

I knew that she meant this for me; and I responded to the cry. "Yes,
M. le Maire," I said, "I am afraid that you have made a mistake. I can
answer for Madame as for myself."

The Mayor rubbed his head.




                             CHAPTER XVI.

                         THREE IN A CARRIAGE.


"Of course, if Madame--if Madame knows nothing of the monk," he said,
looking vacantly about the dirty room, "it is clear that--it seems
clear that there has been a mistake."

"And only one thing remains to be done," I suggested.

"But--but," he continued, with a resumption of his former importance,
"there is still one point unexplained--that of the red cockade,
Monsieur? What of that, M. le Vicomte?"

"The red cockade?" I said.

"Ay, what of that?" he asked briskly.

I had not expected this, and I looked desperately at Madame. Surely
her woman's wit would find a way, whatever the cockade meant. "Have
you asked Madame Corras?" I said at last, feebly shifting the burden.
"Have you asked her to explain it?"

"No," he answered.

"Then I would ask her," I said.

"Nay, do not ask me; ask M. le Vicomte," she answered lightly. "Ask
him of what colour are the facings of the National Guards of Quercy?"

"Red!" I cried, in a burst of relief. "Red!" I knew, for had I not
seen Buton's coat lying by the forge? But how Madame de St. Alais knew
I have no idea.

"Ah!" M. Flandre said, with the air of one still a little doubtful.
"And Madame wears the cockade for that reason?"

"No, M. le Maire," she answered, with a roguish smile; I saw that it
was her plan to humour him. "I do not--my daughter does. If you wish
to ask further, or the reason, you must ask her."

M. Flandre had the curiosity of the true bourgeois, and the love of
the sex. He simpered. "If Mademoiselle would be so good," he said.

Denise had remained up to this point hidden behind her mother, but at
the word she crept out, and reluctantly and like a prisoner brought to
the bar, stood before us. It was only when she spoke, however, nay, it
was not until she had spoken some words that I understood the full
change that I saw in her; or why, instead of the picture of pallid
weariness which she had presented a few minutes before, she now
showed, as she stood forward, a face covered with blushes, and eyes
shining and suffused.

"It is simple, Monsieur," she said in a low voice. "My _fianc_, M. le
Maire, is in that regiment."

"And you wear it for that reason?" the Mayor cried, delighted.

"I love him," she said softly. And for a moment--for a moment her eyes
met mine.

Then I know not which was the redder, she or I; or which found that
vile and filthy room more like a palace, its tobacco-laden air more
sweet! I had not dreamed what she was going to say, least of all had I
dreamed what her eyes said, as for that instant they met mine and
turned my blood to fire! I lost the Mayor's blunt answer and his
chuckling laugh; and only returned to a sense of the present when
Mademoiselle slipped back to hide her burning face behind her mother,
and I saw in her place Madame, facing me, with her finger to her lip,
and a glance of warning in her eyes.

It was a warning not superfluous, for in the flush of my first
enthusiasm I might have said anything. And the Mayor was in better
hands than mine. The little touch of romance and sentiment which
Mademoiselle's avowal had imported into the matter, had removed his
last suspicion and won his heart. He ogled Madame, he beamed on the
girl with fatherly gallantry. He made a jest of the monk.

"A mistake, and yet one I cannot deplore, Madame," he protested, with
clumsy civility. "For it has given me the pleasure of seeing you."

"Oh, M. le Maire!" Madame simpered.

"But the state of the country is really such," he continued, "that
for the beautiful sex to be travelling alone is not safe. It exposes
them----"

"To worse _rencontres_ than this, I fear," Madame said, darting a look
from her fine eyes. "If this were the worst we poor women had to
fear!" And she looked at him again.

"Ah, Madame!" he said, delighted.

"But, alas, we have no escort."

The fat Mayor sighed, I think that he was going to offer himself. Then
a thought struck him. "Perhaps this gentleman," and he turned to me.
"You go to Nmes, M. le Vicomte?"

"Yes," I said. "And, of course, if Madame Corras----"

"Oh, it would be troubling M. le Vicomte," Madame said; and she went a
step farther from me and a step nearer to M. Flandre, as if he must
understand her hesitation.

"I am sure it could be no trouble to any one!" he answered stoutly.
"But for the matter of that, if M. le Vicomte perceives any
difficulty," and he laid his hand on his heart, "I will find some
one----"

"Some one?" Madame said archly.

"Myself," the Mayor answered.

"Ah!" she cried, "if you----"

But I thought that now I might safely step in. "No, no," I said. "M.
le Maire is taking all against me. I can assure you, Madame, I shall
be glad to be of service to you. And our roads lie together. If,
therefore----"

"I shall be grateful," Madame answered with a delightful little
courtesy. "That is, if M. le Maire will let out his poor prisoners.
Who, as he now knows, have done nothing worse than sympathise with
National Guards."

"I will take it on myself, Madame," M. Flandre said, with vast
importance. He had been brought to the desired point. "The case is
quite clear. But----" he paused and coughed slightly, "to avoid
complications, you had better leave early. When you are gone, I shall
know what explanations to give. And if you would not object to
spending the night here," he continued, looking round him, with a
touch of sheepishness, "I think that----"

"We shall mind it less than before," Madame said, with a look and a
sigh. "I feel safe since you have been to see us." And she held out a
hand that was still white and plump.

The Mayor kissed it.

                          *   *   *   *   *

As I walked, a few minutes later, across the square, picking my steps
by the yellow light of M. Flandre's lantern, and at times enveloped in
the flying skirt of his cloak--for the good man had his own visions
and for a hundred yards together forgot his company--I could have
thought all that had passed a dream; so unreal seemed the squalid
prison-lodging I had just left, so marvellous the ladies' presence in
it, so incredible Mademoiselle's blushing avowal made to my face. But
a wheezing clock overhead struck the hour before midnight, and I
counted the strokes; a watchman, not far from me, cried, after the old
fashion, that it was eleven o'clock and a fine night; and I stumbled
over a stone. No, I was not dreaming.

But if I had to stumble then, to persuade myself that I was awake, how
was it with me next morning, when, with the first glimmer of light, I
walked beside the carriage from the inn to the prison, and saw, before
I reached the gloomy door, Madame and Mademoiselle standing shivering
under the wall beside it? How was it with me when I held
Mademoiselle's hand in mine, as I helped her in, and then followed her
in and sat opposite to her--sat opposite to her with the knowledge
that I was so to sit for days, that I was to be her fellow-traveller,
that we were to go to Nmes together?

Ah, how was it, indeed? But there is nothing quite perfect; there is
no hour in which a man says that he is quite happy; and a shadow of
fear and stealth darkened my bliss that morning. The Mayor was there
to see us start, and I fancy that it was his face of apprehension that
lay at the bottom of this feeling. A moment, however, and the face was
gone from the window; another, and the carriage began to roll quickly
through the dim streets, while we lay back, each in a corner, hidden
by the darkness even from one another. Still, we had the gates to
pass, and the guard; or the watch might stop us, or some early-rising
townsman, or any one of a hundred accidents. My heart beat fast.

But all went well. Within five minutes we had passed the gates and
left them behind us, and were rolling in safety along the road. The
dawn was no more than grey, the trees showed black against the sky, as
we crossed the Tarn by the great bridge, and began to climb the valley
of the Dourbie.

I have said that we could not see one another. But on a sudden Madame
laughed out of the darkness of her corner. "O Richard, O _mon Roi!_"
she hummed. Then "The fat fool!" she cried; and she laughed again.

I thought her cruel, and almost an ingrate; but she was Mademoiselle's
mother, and I said nothing. Mademoiselle was opposite to me, and I was
happy. I was happy, thinking what she would say to me, and how she
would look at me, when the day came and she could no longer escape my
eyes; when the day came and the dainty, half-shrouded face that
already began to glimmer in the roomy corner of the old berlin should
be mine to look on, to feast my eyes on, to question and read through
long days and hours of a journey, a journey through heaven!

Already it was growing light; I had but a little longer to wait. A
rosy flush began to tinge one half the sky; the other half, pale blue
and flecked with golden clouds, lay behind us. A few seconds, and the
mountain tips caught the first rays of the sun, and floated far over
us, in golden ether. I cast one greedy glance at Mademoiselle's face,
saw there the dawn out-blushed, I met for one second her eyes and saw
the glory of the ether outshone--and then I looked away, trembling. It
seemed sacrilege to look longer.

Suddenly Madame laughed again, out of her corner; a laugh that made me
wince, and grow hot. "She is not made for a nun, M. le Vicomte, is
she?" she said.

I bounced in my seat. The speaker's tone, gay, insulting, flicked, not
me, but the girl, like a whip.

"You really, Denise, must have had practice," Madame continued
smoothly. "I love, you love, we love--you are quite perfect. Did you
practise with M. le Directeur? Or with the big boys over the wall?"

"Madame!" I cried. The girl had drawn her hood over her face, but I
could fancy her shame.

But Madame was inexorable. "Really, Denise, I do not know that I
ever told even your father 'I love you,'" she said. "At any rate,
until he had kissed me on the lips. But I suppose that you reverse the
order----"

"Madame," I stammered. "This is infamous!"

"What, Monsieur?" she answered, this time heeding me. "May I not
punish my daughter in my own way?"

"Not before me," I retorted, full of wrath. "It is cruel! It is----"

"Oh, before you, M. le Vicomte?" Madame answered, mocking me. "And why
not before you? I cannot degrade her lower than she has herself
stooped!"

"It is false!" I cried, in hot rage. "It is a cruel falsehood!"

"Oh, I can? Then if I please, I shall!" Madame answered, with ruthless
pleasantry. "And you, Monsieur, will sit by and listen, if I please.
Though, make no mistake, M. le Vicomte," she continued, leaning
forward, and gazing keenly into my face. "Because I punish her before
you, do not think that you are, or ever shall be, of the family. Or
that this unmaidenly, immodest----"

Mademoiselle uttered a cry of pain, and shrank lower in her corner.

"Little fool," Madame continued coolly, "who, when she was primed with
a cock-and-bull story about the cockade, must needs add, 'I love
him'--I love him, and she a maiden!--will ever be anything to you! That
link was broken long ago. It was broken when your friends burned our
house at St. Alais; it was broken when they sacked our house in
Cahors; it was broken when they made our king a prisoner, when they
murdered our friends, when they dragged our Church a slave at the
chariot wheels of their triumph; ay, and broken once for all, beyond
mending by mock heroics! Understand that fully, M. le Vicomte," Madame
continued pitilessly. "But as you saw her stoop, you shall see her
punished. She is the first St. Alais that ever wooed a lover!"

I knew that of the family which would have given the lie to that
statement; but it was not a tale for Mademoiselle's ears, and instead
I rose. "At least, Madame," I said, bowing, "I can free Mademoiselle
from the embarrassment of my presence. And I shall do so."

"No, you will not do even that," Madame answered unmoved. "If you will
sit down, I will tell you why."

I sat down, compelled by her tone.

"You will not do it," Madame continued, looking me coolly in the face,
"because I am bound to admit, though I no longer like you, that you
are a gentleman."

"And therefore should leave you."

"On the contrary, for that reason you will continue to travel with
us."

"Outside," I said.

"No, inside," she answered quietly. "We have no passport nor papers;
without your company we should be stopped in each town through which
we pass. It is unfortunate," Madame continued, shrugging her
shoulders; "--I did not know that the country was in so bad a state,
or I would have taken precautions--it is unfortunate. But as it is we
must put up with it and travel together."

I felt a warm rush of joy, of triumph, of coming vengeance. "Thank
you, Madame," I said, and I bowed to her, "for telling me that. It
seems, then, that you are in my power."

"Ah?"

"And that to requite you for the pain you have just caused
Mademoiselle, I have only to leave you."

"Well?"

"I see even now a little town before us; in three minutes we shall
enter it. Very well, Madame. If you say another word to your daughter,
if you insult her again in my presence by so much as a syllable, I
leave you and go my way."

To my surprise Madame St. Alais broke into a silvery laugh. "You will
not, Monsieur," she said. "And yet I shall treat my daughter as I
please."

"I shall do so!"

"You will not."

"Why, then? Why shall I not?" I cried.

"Because," she answered, laughing softly, "you are a gentleman, M. le
Vicomte, and can neither leave us nor endanger us. That is all."

I sank back in my seat, and glared at her in speechless indignation;
seeing in a flash my impotence and her power. The cushions burned me;
but I could not leave them.

She laughed again, well pleased. "There, I have told you what you will
not do," she said. "Now I am going to tell you what you will do. In
front, I am told, they are very suspicious. The story of Madame
Corvas, even if backed by your word, may not suffice. You will say,
therefore, that I am your mother, and that Mademoiselle is your
sister. She would prefer, I daresay," Madame continued, with a cutting
glance at her daughter, "to pass for your wife. But that does not suit
me."

I breathed hard; but I was helpless as any prisoner, closely bound to
obedience as any slave. I could not denounce them, and I could not
leave them; honour and love were alike concerned. Yet I foresaw that I
must listen, hour by hour, and mile by mile, to gibes at the girl's
expense, to sneers at her modesty, to words that cut like whip-lashes.
That was Madame's plan. The girl must travel with me, must breathe the
same air with me, must sit for hours with the hem of her skirt
touching my boot. It was necessary for the safety of all. But, after
this, after what we had both heard, if her eye met mine, it could only
fall; if her hand touched mine, she must shrink in shame. Henceforth
there was a barrier between us.

As a fact, Mademoiselle's pride came to her aid, and she sat, neither
weeping nor protesting, nor seeking to join her forces to mine by a
glance; but bearing all with steadfast patience, she looked out of the
window when I pretended to sleep, and looked towards her mother when I
sat erect. Possibly she found her compensations, and bore her
punishment quietly for their sake. But I did not think of that.
Possibly, too, she suffered less than I fancied; but I doubt if she
would admit that, even to-day.

At any rate she had heard me fight her battle; yet she did not speak
to me nor I to her; and under these strange conditions we began and
pursued the strangest journey man ever made. We drove through pleasant
valleys growing green, over sterile passes, where winter still fringed
the rocks with snow, through sunshine, and in the teeth of cold
mountain winds; but we scarcely heeded any of these things. Our hearts
and thoughts lay inside the carriage, where Madame sat smiling, and we
two kept grim silence.

About noon we halted to rest and eat at a little village inn, high up.
It seemed to me a place almost at the end of the world, with a chaos
of mountains rising tier on tier above it, and slopes of shale below.
But the frenzy of the time had reached even this barren nook. Before
we had taken two mouthfuls, the Syndic called to see our papers;
and--God knows I had no choice--Madame passed for my mother, and
Denise for my sister. Then, while the Syndic still stood bowing over
my commission, and striving to learn from me what news there was
below, a horse halted at the door, and I heard a man's voice, and in a
breath M. le Baron de Gol walked in. There was a single decent room
in the inn--that in which we sat--and he came into it.

He uncovered, seeing ladies; and recognising me with a start smiled,
but a trifle sourly. "You set off early?" he said. "I waited at the
east gate, but you did not come, Monsieur."

I coloured, conscience-stricken, and begged a thousand pardons. As a
fact, I had clean forgotten him. I had not once thought of the
appointment I had made with him at the gate.

"You are not riding?" he said, looking at my companions a little
strangely.

"No," I answered. And I could not find another word to say. The Syndic
still stood smiling and bowing beside me; and on a sudden I saw the
pit on the edge of which I tottered; and my face burned.

"You have met friends?" M. le Baron persisted, looking, hat in hand,
at Madame.

"Yes," I muttered. Politeness required that I should introduce him.
But I dared not.

However, at that, he at last took the hint; and retired with the
Syndic. The moment they were over the threshold Madame flashed out at
me, in a passion of anger. "Fool!" she said, without ceremony, "why
did you not present him? Don't you know that that is the way to arouse
suspicion, and ruin us? A child could see that you had something to
hide. If you had presented him at once to your mother----"

"Yes, Madame?"

"He would have gone away satisfied."

"I doubt it, Madame, and for a very good reason," I answered
cynically. "Seeing that yesterday I told him, with the utmost
particularity, that I had neither mother nor sister."

That afforded me a little revenge. Madame St. Alais went white and red
in the same instant, and sat a moment with her lips pressed together,
and her eyes on the table. "Who is he? What do you know of him?" she
said at last.

"He is a poor gentleman and a bigoted Protestant," I answered drily.

She bit her lip. "_Bon Dieu!_" she muttered. "Who could have foreseen
such an accident? Do you think that he suspects anything?"

"Doubtless. To begin, I left early this morning, in breach of an
agreement to travel with him. When he learns, in addition, that I am
travelling with my mother and sister, whom yesterday I did not
possess----"

Madame looked at me, as if she would strike me. "What will you do?"
she cried.

"It is for my mother to say," I answered politely. And I helped myself
very indifferently to cheese. "She dictated this policy."

She was white with rage, and perhaps alarm; I chuckled secretly,
seeing her condition. But rage availed her little; she had to humble
herself. "What do you advise?" she said at last.

"There is only one course open," I answered. "We must brazen it out."

She agreed. But this, though a very easy course to advise, was one
anything but easy to pursue. I discovered that, a few minutes later,
when I went out to see if the carriage was ready, and found De Gol in
the doorway with a face as hard as his own hills. "You are starting?"
he said.

I muttered that I was.

"I find that I have to congratulate you," he continued, with a smile
of unpleasant meaning.

"On what, Monsieur?"

"On finding your family," he answered, looking at me with a bitter
sort of humour. "To discover both a mother and a sister in twenty-four
hours must be great happiness. But--may I give you a hint, M. le
Vicomte?"

"If you please," I said, with desperate coolness.

"Then if--being so happy in making discoveries--you happen to light
next on M. Froment--on M. Froment, the firebrand of Nmes, false
Capuchin, and false traitor!--do not adopt him also! That is all."

"I am not acquainted with him," I said coldly. He had spoken with
passion and fire.

"Do not become so," he answered.

I shrugged my shoulders, and he said no more; and in a moment Madame
and Mademoiselle came out, and took their seats, and I set out to walk
up the hill beside the horses.

The ascent was steep and long and toilsome, and a dozen times as we
climbed out of the valley we had to halt to breathe the cattle; a
dozen times I looked back at the grey mountain inn lying on the
desolate grey plateau at our feet. Always I found the Baron looking up
at us, stern and gaunt and motionless as the house before which he
stood. And I shivered.




                            CHAPTER XVII.

                          FROMENT OF NMES.


This encounter served neither to raise my spirits nor to remove the
apprehensions with which I looked forward to our arrival in places
more populous; places where suspicion, once roused, might be less
easily allayed. True, Gol had not betrayed me, but he might have his
reasons for that; nor did the fact any the more reconcile me to having
on our trail this grim stalking-horse in whose person a fanaticism I
had deemed dead lurked behind modern doctrines, and sought under the
cloak of a new party to avenge old injuries. The barren slopes and
rugged peaks that rose above us, as we plodded toilsomely onward, the
windswept passes over which the horses scarce dragged the empty
carriage, the melancholy fields of snow that lay to right and left,
all tended to deepen the impression made on my mind; so that feeling
him one with his native hills, I longed to escape from them, I longed
to be clear of this desolation and to see before me the sunshine and
olive slopes sweep down to the southern sea.

Yet even here there was a counterpoise. The peril which had startled
me had not been lost on Madame St. Alais; it had sensibly lowered her
tone, and damped the triumph with which she had been disposed to treat
me. She was more quiet; and sitting in her place, or walking beside
the labouring carriage, as it slowly wound its way round shoulders, or
wearily climbed long _lacets_, she left me to myself. Nay, it did not
escape me that distance, far from relieving, seemed to aggravate her
anxiety; so that the farther we left the uncouth Baron behind, the
more restless she grew, the more keenly she scanned the road behind
us, and the less regard she paid to me.

This left me at liberty to use my eyes as I would; and I remember to
this day that hour spent under the shoulder of Mont Aigoual.
Mademoiselle, worn out by days and nights of exertion, had fallen
asleep in her corner, and shaken by the jolting of the coach had let
the cloak slip from her face. A faint flush warmed her cheeks, as if
even in sleep she felt my eyes upon her; and though a tear presently
stole from under her long lashes, a smile almost nave--a smile that
remained while the tear passed--seemed to say that the joys of that
strange day surpassed the pains, and that in her sleep Mademoiselle
found nothing to regret. God, how I watched that smile! How I hoped
that it was for me, how I prayed for her! Never before had it been my
happiness to gaze on her uncontrolled, as I did now; to trace the
shadow where the first tendrils of her hair stole up from the smooth,
white forehead, to learn the soft curves of lips and chin, and the
dainty ear half-hidden; to gaze at the blue-veined eyelids half in
fear, half in the hope that they might rise and discover me!

Denise, my Denise! I breathed the word softly, in my heart, and was
happy. In spite of all--the cold, the journey, Gol, Madame--I was
happy. And then in a moment I fell to earth, as I heard a voice say
clearly, "Is that he?"

It was Madame's voice, and I turned to her. I was relieved to find
that she was not looking my way, but was on her feet, gazing back the
way we had come. And in a moment, whether she gave an order or the
driver halted on his own motion, the carriage came to a stand; in a
mountain pass, where rocks lay huddled on either side.

"What is it?" I said in wonder.

She did not answer, but on the silence of the road and the mountains
rose the thin strain of a whistled air. The air was "O Richard, _O mon
Roi!_" In that solitude of rock and fell, it piped high and thin, and
had a weird startling effect. I thrust out my head on the other side,
and saw a man walking after us at his leisure; as if we had passed
him, and then stood to wait for him. He was tall and stout, wore boots
and a common-looking cloak; but for all that he had not the air of a
man of the country.

"You are going to Ganges?" Madame cried to him, without preface.

"Yes, Madame," he answered, as he came quietly up, and saluted her.

"We can take you on," she said.

"A thousand thanks," he answered, his eyes twinkling. "You are too
good. If the gentleman does not object?" And he looked at me, smiling
without disguise.

"Oh, no!" Madame said, with a touch of contempt in her voice, "the
gentleman will not object."

But that gave me, in the middle of my astonishment, the fillip that I
needed. The device of the meeting was so transparent, the appearance
of this man, in cloak and boots, on the desolate road far from any
habitation, was so clearly a part of an arranged plan, that I could
not swallow it; I must either fall in with it, be dupe, and play my
_rle_ with my eyes open, or act at once. I awoke from my
astonishment. "One moment, Madame," I said. "I do not know who this
gentleman is."

She had resumed her seat, and the stranger had come up to the window
on her side, and was looking in. He had a face of striking power,
large-sized and coarse, but not unpleasant; with quick, bright eyes,
and mobile lips that smiled easily. The hand he laid on the carriage
door was immense.

I think my words took Madame by surprise. She flashed round on me.
"Nonsense," she cried imperiously. And to him, "Get in, Monsieur."

"No," I retorted, half-rising. "Stay, if you please. Stay where you
are, until----"

Madame turned to me, furious. "This is my carriage," she said.

"Absolutely," I answered.

"Then what do you mean?"

"Only that if this gentleman enters it, I leave it."

For an instant we looked at one another. Then she saw that I was
determined, and, knowing my position, she lowered her tone. "Why?" she
said, breathing quickly. "Why, because he enters it, should you leave
it?"

"Because, Madame," I answered, "I see no reason for taking in a
stranger whom we do not know. This gentleman may be everything that is
upright----"

"He is no stranger!" she snapped. "I know him. Will that satisfy you?"

"If he will give me his name," I said.

Hitherto he had stood unmoved by the discussion, looking with a smile
from one to the other of us; but at this he struck in. "With pleasure,
Monsieur," he said. "My name is Alibon, and I am an advocate of
Montauban, who last week had the good fortune----"

"No," I said, interrupting him brusquely, and once for all; "I think
not. Not Alibon of Montauban. Froment of Nmes, I think, Monsieur."

A little tract of snow flushed by the sunset lay behind him, and by
contrast darkened his face; I could not see how he took my words. And
a few seconds elapsed before he answered. When he did, however, he
spoke calmly, and I fancied I detected as much vanity as chagrin in
his tone. "Well, Monsieur," he said, "and if I am? What then?"

"If you are," I replied resolutely, meeting his eyes, "I decline to
travel with you."

"And therefore," he retorted, "Madame, whose carriage this is, must
not travel with me!"

"No, since she cannot travel without me," I answered with spirit.

He frowned at that; but in a moment, "And why?" he said with a sneer.
"Am I not good enough for your excellency's company?"

"It is not a question of goodness," I said bluntly, "but of a
passport, Monsieur. If you ask me, I do not travel with you because I
hold a commission under the present Government, and I believe you to
be working against that Government. I have lied for Madame St. Alais
and her daughter. She was a woman and I had to save her. But I will
not lie for you, nor be your cloak. Is that plain, Monsieur?"

"Quite," he said slowly. "Yet I serve the King. Whom do you serve?"

I was silent.

"Whose is this commission, Monsieur, that must not be contaminated?"

I writhed under the sneer, but I was silent.

"Come, M. le Vicomte," he continued frankly, and in a different tone.
"Be yourself, I pray. I am Froment, you have guessed it. I am also a
fugitive, and were my name spoken in Villeraugues, a league on, I
should hang for it. And in Ganges the like. I am at your mercy,
therefore, and I ask you to shelter me. Let me pass through Sumne and
Ganges as one of your party; thenceforth onwards," he added with a
smile and a gesture of conscious pride, "I can shift for myself."

I do not wonder I hesitated, I wonder I resisted. It seemed so small a
thing to ask, so great a thing to refuse, that, though half a minute
before my mind had been made up, I wavered; wavered miserably. I felt
my face burn, I felt the passionate ardour of Madame's eyes as they
devoured it, I felt the call of the silence for my answer. And I was
near assenting. But as I turned feverishly in my seat to avoid
Madame's look, my hand touched the packet which contained the
commission, and the contact wrought a revulsion of feeling. I saw the
thing as I had seen it before, and, rightly or wrongly, revolted from
that which I had nearly done.

"No," I cried angrily. "I will not! I will not!"

"You coward!" Madame cried with sudden passion. And she sprang up as
if to strike me, but sat down again trembling.

"It may be," I said. "But I will not do it."

"Why? Why? Why?" she cried.

"Because I carry that commission; and to use it to shelter M. Froment
were a thing M. Froment would not do himself. That is all."

He shrugged his shoulders, and magnanimously kept silence. But she was
furious. "Quixote!" she cried. "Oh, you are intolerable! But you shall
suffer for it. _Eh, bien_, Monsieur, you shall suffer for it!" she
repeated vehemently.

"Nay, Madame, you need not threaten," I retorted.

"For if I would, I could not. You forget that M. de Gol is no more
than a league behind us, and bound for Nmes; he may appear at any
moment. At best he is sure to lodge where we do to-night. If he
finds," I continued drily, "that I have added a brother to my growing
family, I do not think that he will take it lightly."

But this, though she must have seen the sense of it, had no effect
upon her. "Oh, you are intolerable!" she cried again. "Let me out! Let
me out, Monsieur."

This last to Froment. I did not gainsay her, and he let her out, and
the two walked a few paces away, talking rapidly.

I followed them with my eyes; and seeing him now, detached, as it
were, and solitary in that dreary landscape--a man alone and in
danger--I began to feel some compunction. A moment more, and I might
have repented; but a touch fell on my sleeve, and I turned with a
start to find Denise leaning towards me, with her face rapt and eager.

"Monsieur," she whispered eagerly; before she could say more I seized
the hand with which she had touched me, and kissed it fiercely.

"No, Monsieur, no," she whispered, drawing it from me with her face
grown crimson--but her eyes still met mine frankly. "Not now. I want
to speak to you, to warn you, to ask you----"

"And I, Mademoiselle," I cried in the same low tone, "want to bless
you, to thank you----"

"I want to ask you to take care of yourself," she persisted, shaking
her head almost petulantly at me, to silence me. "Listen! Some trap
will be laid for you. My mother would not harm you, though she is
angry; but that man is desperate, and we are in straits. Be careful,
therefore, Monsieur, and----"

"Have no fear," I said.

"Ah, but I have fear," she answered.

And the way in which she said that, and the way in which she looked at
me, and looked away again like a startled bird, filled me with
happiness--with intense happiness; so that, though Madame came back at
that moment, and no more passed between us, not even a look, but we
had to sink back in our seats, and affect indifference, I was a
different man for it. Perhaps something of this appeared in my face,
for Madame, as she came up to the door, shot a suspicious glance at
me, a glance almost of hatred; and from me looked keenly at her
daughter. However, nothing was said except by Froment, who came up to
the door and closed it, after she had entered. He raised his hat to
me.

"M. le Vicomte," he said, with a little bitterness, "if a dog came to
my door, as I came to you to-day, I would take him in!"

"You would do as I have done," I said.

"No," he said firmly; "I would take him in. Nevertheless, when we meet
at Nmes, I hope to convert you."

"To what?" I said coldly.

"To having a little faith," he answered, with dryness. "To having a
little faith in something--and risking somewhat for it, Monsieur. I
stand here," he went on, with a gesture that was not without grandeur,
"alone and homeless, to-day; I do not know where I shall lie to-night.
And why, M. le Vicomte? Because I alone in France have faith! Because
I alone believe in anything! Because I alone believe even in myself!
Do you think," he continued with rising scorn, "that if you nobles
believed in your nobility, you could be unseated? Never! Or that if
you, who say 'Long live the King!' believed in your King, he could be
unseated? Never! Or that if you who profess to obey the Church
believed in her, she could be uprooted? Never! But you believe in
nothing, you admire nothing, you reverence nothing--and therefore you
are doomed! Yes, doomed; for even the men with whom you have linked
yourself have a sort of bastard faith in their theories, their
philosophy, their reforms, that are to regenerate the world. But
you--you believe in nothing; and you shall pass, as you pass from me
now!"

He waved his hand with a gesture of menace, and before I could answer,
the carriage rolled on, and left him standing there; the grey
landscape, cold and barren, took the place of his face at the door.
The light was beginning to fail; we were still a league from
Villeraugues. I was glad to feel the carriage moving, and to be free
from him; my heart, too, was warm because Denise sat opposite me,
and I loved her. But for all that--and though Madame, glowering at me
from her corner, troubled me little--the thought that I had deserted
him--that, and his words, and one word in particular, hummed in my
head, and oppressed me with a sense of coming ill. "Doomed! Doomed!"
He had said it as if he meant it. I could no longer question his
eloquence. I could no longer be ignorant why they called him the
firebrand of Nmes. The hot breath of the southern city had come from
him; the passion of world-old strifes had spoken in his voice.
Uneasily I pondered over what he had said, and recalled the words
spoken by Father Benit, even by Gol, to the same effect; and so
brooded in my corner, while the carriage jolted on and darkness fell,
until presently we stopped in the village street.

I offered Madame St. Alais my arm to descend. "No, Monsieur," she
said, repelling me with passion; "I will not touch you."

She meant, I think, to seclude herself and Mademoiselle, and leave me
to sup alone. But in the inn there was only one great room for
parlour, and kitchen, and all; and a little cupboard, veiled by a
dingy curtain, in which the women might sleep if they pleased, but in
which they could not possibly eat. The inn was, in fact, the worst in
which I had stopped--the maid draggled and dirty, and smelling of the
stable; the company three boors; the floor of earth; the windows
unglazed. Madame, accustomed to travel, and supported by her anger,
took all with the ease of a fine lady; but Denise, fresh from her
convent, winced at the brawling and oaths that rose round her, and
cowered, pale and frightened, on her stool.

A hundred times I was on the point of interfering to protect her from
these outrages; but her eyes, when they made me happy by timidly
seeking mine for an instant, seemed to pray me to abstain; and the
men, as their senseless tirades showed, were delegates from Castres,
who at a word would have raised the cry of "Aristocrats!" I refrained,
therefore, and doubtless with wisdom; but even the arrival of Gol
would have been a welcome interruption.

I have said that Madame heeded them little; but it presently appeared
that I was mistaken. After we had supped, and when the noise was at
its height, she came to me, where I sat a little apart, and, throwing
into her tone all the anger and disgust which her face so well masked,
she cried in my ear that we must start at daybreak.

"At daybreak--or before!" she whispered fiercely. "This is horrible!
horrible!" she continued. "This place is killing me! I would start
now, cold and dark as it is, if----"

"I will speak to them," I said, taking a step towards the table.

She clutched my sleeve, and pinched me until I winced. "Fool!" she
said. "Would you ruin us all? A word, and we are betrayed. No; but at
daybreak we go. We shall not sleep; and the moment it is light we go!"

I consented, of course; and, going to the driver, who had taken our
place at the table, she whispered him also, and then came back to me,
and bade me call him if he did not rise. This settled, she went
towards the closet, whither Mademoiselle had already retired; but
unfortunately her movements had drawn on her the attention of the
clowns at the table, and one of these, rising suddenly as she passed,
intercepted her.

"A toast, Madame! a toast!" he cried, with a gross hiccough; and
reeling on his feet, he thrust a cup of wine in front of her. "A
toast; and one that every man, woman, and child in France must drink,
or be d----d! And that is the Tricolour! The Tricolour; and down with
Madame Veto! The Tricolour, Madame! Drink to it!"

The drunken wretch pressed the cup on her, while his comrades roared,
"Drink! Drink! The Tricolour; and down with Madame Veto!" and added
jests and oaths I will not write.

This was too much; I sprang to my feet to chastise the wretches. But
Madame, who preserved her presence of mind to a marvel, checked me by
a glance. "No," she said, raising her head proudly; "I will not
drink!"

"Ah!" he cried with a vile laugh. "An aristocrat, are we? Drink,
nevertheless, or we shall show you----"

"I will not drink!" she retorted, facing him with superb courage. "And
more, when M. de Gol arrives to-night, you will have to give an
account to him."

The man's face fell. "You know the Baron de Gol?" he said in a
different tone.

"I left him at the last village, and I expect him here to-night," she
answered coolly. "And I would advise you, Monsieur, to drink your own
toasts, and let others go! For he is not a man to brook an insult!"

The brawler shrugged his shoulders, to hide his mortification. "Oh! if
you are a friend of his," he muttered, preparing to slink back to the
table, "I suppose it is all right. He is a good man. No offence. If
you are not an aristocrat----"

"I am no more of an aristocrat than is M. de Gol," she answered. And,
with a cold bow, she turned, and went to the closet.

The men were a little less noisy after that; for Madame had rightly
guessed that Gol's name was known and respected. They presently
wrapped themselves in their cloaks, and lay down on the floor; and I
did the same, passing the night, in the result, in greater comfort
than I expected.

At first, it is true, I did not sleep; but later I fell into an uneasy
slumber, and, passing from one troubled dream to another--for which I
had, doubtless, to thank the foul air of the room--I awoke at last
with a start, to find some one leaning over me. Apparently it was
still night, for all was quiet; but the red embers of the fire glowed
on the hearth, and dimly lit up the room, enabling me to see that it
was Madame St. Alais who had roused me. She pointed to the other men,
who still lay snoring.

"Hush!" she whispered, with her finger on her lip. "It is after five.
Jules is harnessing the horses. I have paid the woman here, and in
five minutes we shall be ready."

"But the sun will not rise for another hour," I answered. This was
early starting with a vengeance!

Madame, however, had set her heart upon it. "Do you want to expose us
to more of this?" she said, in a furious whisper. "To keep us here
until Gol arrives, perhaps?"

"I am ready, Madame," I said.

This satisfied her; she flitted away without any more, and disappeared
behind the curtain, and I heard whispering. I put on my boots, and,
the room being very cold, stooped a moment over the fire, and drawing
the embers together with my foot, warmed myself. Then I put on my
cravat and sword, which I had removed, and stood ready to start. It
seemed uselessly early; and we had started so early the day before! If
Madame wished it, however, it was my place to give way to her.

In a moment she came to me again; and I saw, even by that light, that
her face was twitching with eagerness. "Oh!" she said; "will he never
come? That man will be all day. Go and hasten him, Monsieur! If Gol
comes? Go, for pity's sake, and hasten him!"

I wondered, thinking such haste utterly vain and foolish--it was not
likely that Gol would arrive at this hour; but, concluding that
Madame's nerves had failed at last, I thought it proper to comply,
and, stepping carefully over the sleepers, reached the door. I raised
the latch, and in a moment was outside, and had closed the door behind
me. The bitter dawn wind, laden with a fine snow, lashed my cheeks,
and bit through my cloak, and made me shiver. In the east the daybreak
was only faintly apparent; in every other quarter it was still night,
and, for all I could see, might be midnight.

Very little in charity with Madame, I picked my way, shivering, to the
door of the stable--a mean hovel, in a line with the house, and set in
a sea of mud. It was closed, but a dim yellow light, proceeding from a
window towards the farther end, showed me where Jules was at work; and
I raised the latch, and called him. He did not answer, and I had to go
in to him, passing behind three or four wretched nags--some on their
legs and some lying down--until I came to our horses, which stood side
by side at the end, with the lantern hung on a hook near them.

Still I did not see Jules, and I was standing wondering where he
was--for he did not answer--when, with a whish, something black struck
me in the face. It blinded me; in a moment I found myself struggling
in the folds of a cloak, that completely enveloped my face, while a
grip of iron seized my arms and bound them to my sides. Taken
completely by surprise, I tried to shout, but the heavy cloak
stifled me; when, struggling desperately, I succeeded in uttering a
half-choked cry, other hands than those which held me pressed the
cloak more tightly over my face. In vain I writhed and twisted, and,
half-suffocated, tried to free myself. I felt hands pass deftly over
me, and knew that I was being robbed. Then, as I still resisted, the
man who held me from behind tripped me up, and I fell, still in his
grasp, on my face on the ground.

Fortunately I fell on some litter; but, even so, the shock drove the
breath out of me; and what with that and the cloak, which in this new
position threatened to strangle me outright, I lay a moment helpless,
while the wretches bound my hands behind me, and tied my ankles
together. Thus secured, I felt myself taken up, and carried a little
way, and flung roughly down on a soft bed--of hay, as I knew by the
scent. Then some one threw a truss of hay on me, and more and more
hay, until I thought that I should be stifled, and tried frantically
to shout. But the cloak was wound two or three times round my head,
and, strive as I would, I could only, with all my efforts, force out a
dull cry, that died, smothered in its folds.




                            CHAPTER XVIII.

                            A POOR FIGURE.


I did not struggle long. The efforts I had made to free myself from
the men, and this last exertion of striving to shout, brought the
blood to my head; and so exhausted me that I lay inert, my heart
panting as if it would suffocate me, and my lungs craving more air. I
was in danger of being stifled in earnest, and knew it; but,
fortunately, the horror of this fate, which a minute before had driven
me to frantic efforts, now gave me the supreme courage to lie still,
and, collecting myself, do all I could to get air.

It was time I did. I was hot as fire, and sweating at every pore;
however the dreadful sensation of choking went off somewhat when I had
lain a while motionless, and by turning my head and chest a little
to the side--which I succeeded in doing, though I could not raise
myself--I breathed more freely. Still, my position was horrible.
Helpless as I was, with the trusses of hay pressing on me, fresh
pains soon rose to take the place of those allayed. The bonds on my
wrists began to burn into my flesh, the hilt of my sword forced itself
into my side, my back seemed to be breaking under the burden, my
shoulders ached intolerably. I was being slowly, slowly pressed to
death, in darkness, and when a cry--a single cry, if I could raise my
voice--would bring relief and succour!

The thought so maddened me that, fancying after an age of this
suffering that I heard a faint sound as of some one moving in the
stable, I lost control of myself, and fell to struggling again; while
groans broke from me instead of cries, and the bonds cut into my arms.
But the paroxysm only added to my misery; the person, whoever he was,
did not hear me, and made no further noise; or, if he did, the blood
coursing to my head, and swelling the veins of my neck almost to
bursting, deafened me to the sound. The horrible weight that I had
raised for a moment sank again. I gave up, I despaired; and lay in a
kind of swoon, unable to think, unable to remember, no longer hoping
for relief, or planning escape, but enduring.

I must have lain thus some time, when a noise loud enough to reach my
dulled ears roused me afresh; I listened, at first with half a heart.
The noise was repeated; then, without further warning, a sharp pain
darted through the calf of my leg. I screamed out; and, though the
cloak and the hay over my head choked the cry, I caught a kind of echo
of it. Then silence.

Stupid as a in an awakened from sleep, I thought for a moment that I
had dreamed both the cry and the pain; and groaned in my misery. The
next moment I felt the hay that lay on me move; then the truss that
pressed most heavily on me was lifted, and I heard voices and cries,
and saw a faint light, and knew I was freed. In a twinkling I felt
myself seized and drawn out, amid a murmur of cries and exclamations.
The cloak was plucked from my head, and, dazzled and half blind, I
found half a dozen faces gaping and staring at me.

"Why, _mon Dieu!_ it is the gentleman who departed this morning!"
cried a woman. And she threw up her hands in astonishment.

I looked at her. She was the woman of the house.

My throat was dry and parched, my lips were swollen; but at the second
attempt I managed to tell her to untie me.

She complied, amid fresh exclamations of surprise and astonishment;
then, as I was so stiff and benumbed as to be powerless, they lifted
me to the door of the stable, where one set a stool, and another
brought a cup of water. This and the cold air restored me, and in a
minute or two I was able to stand. Meanwhile they pressed me with
questions; but I was giddy and confused, and could not for a few
minutes collect myself. By-and-by, however, a person who came up
with an air of importance, and pushed aside the crowd of clowns and
stable-helpers that surrounded me, helped me to find my voice.

"What is it?" he said. "What is it, Monsieur? What brought you in the
stable?"

The woman who kept the inn answered for me that she did not know; that
one of the men going to get hay had struck his fork into my leg, and
so found me.

"But who is he?" the new-comer asked imperatively. He was a tall, thin
man, with a sour face and small, suspicious eyes.

"I am the Vicomte de Saux," I answered.

"Eh!" he said, prolonging the syllable. "And how came you, M. le
Vicomte--if that be your name--in the stable?"

"I have been robbed," I muttered.

"Bobbed!" he answered with a sniff. "Bah! Monsieur; in this commune we
have no robbers."

"Still, I have been robbed," I answered stupidly.

For answer, before I knew what he was about, he plunged his hand,
without ceremony or leave, into the pocket of my coat, and brought out
a purse. He held it up for all to see. "Robbed?" he said in a tone of
irony. "I think not, Monsieur; I think not!"

I looked at the purse in astonishment; then, mechanically putting my
hand into my pocket, I produced first one thing, and then another, and
stared at them. He was right. I had not been robbed. Snuff-box,
handkerchief, my watch and seals, my knife, and a little mirror, and
book--all were there!

"And now I come to think of it," the woman said, speaking suddenly,
"there are a pair of saddle-bags in the house that must belong to the
gentleman! I was wondering a while ago whose they were."

"They are mine!" I cried, memory and sense returning. "They are mine!
But the ladies who were with me? They have not started?"

"They went these three hours back," the woman answered, staring at me.
"And I could have sworn that Monsieur went with them! But, to be sure,
it was only just light, and a mistake is soon made."

A thought that should have occurred to me before--a horrible
thought--darted its sting into my heart. I plunged my hand into the
inner pocket of my coat, and drew it out empty. The commission--the
commission to which I had trusted was gone!

I uttered a cry of rage and glared round me. "What is it?" said the
sour man, meeting my eyes.

"My papers!" I answered, almost gnashing my teeth, as I thought how I
had been tricked and treated. I saw it all now. "My papers!"

"Well?" he said.

"They are gone! I have been robbed of them!"

"Indeed!" he said drily. "That remains to be proved, Monsieur."

I thought that he meant that I might be mistaken, as I had been
mistaken before; and, to make certain, I turned out the pocket.

"No," he said, as drily as before. "I see that they are not there. But
the point is, Monsieur, were they ever there?"

I looked at him.

"Yes," he said, "that is the point, Monsieur. Where are your papers?"

"I tell you I have been robbed of them!" I cried, in a rage.

"And I say, that remains to be proved," he answered. "And until it is
proved, you do not leave here. That is all, Monsieur, and it is
simple."

"And who," I said indignantly, "are you, I should like to know,
Monsieur, who stop travellers on the highway, and ask for papers?"

"Merely the President of the Local Committee," he replied.

"And do you suppose," I said, fuming at his folly, "that I bound my
hands, and stifled myself under that hay, on purpose? On purpose to
pass through your wretched village?"

"I suppose nothing, Monsieur," he answered coolly. "But this is the
road to Turin, where M. d'Artois is said to be collecting the
disaffected; and to Nmes, where mischievous persons are flaunting the
red cockade. And without papers, no one passes."

"But what will you do with me?" I asked, seeing that the clowns, who
gaped round us, regarded him as nothing less than a Solomon.

"Detain you, M. le Vicomte, until you procure papers," he answered.

"But, _mon Dieu!_" I said. "That is not so easily done here. Who is
likely to know me?"

He shrugged his shoulders. "Monsieur does not leave without the
papers," he said. "That is all."

And he spoke truly, that was all. In vain I laid the facts before him,
and asked if any one would voluntarily suffer, merely to hide his lack
of papers, what I had undergone; in vain I asked if the state in which
I had been found was not itself proof that I had been robbed; if a man
could tie his own hands, and pile hay on himself. In vain even that I
said I knew who had robbed me; the last statement only made matters
worse.

"Indeed!" he said ironically. "Then, pray, who was it?"

"The rogue Froment! Froment of Nmes!"

"He is not in this country."

"Indeed! I saw him yesterday," I answered.

"Then that settles the matter," the Committee-man answered, with a
grim smile; and his little court smiled too. "After that, we certainly
cannot lose sight of M. le Vicomte."

And so well did he keep his word, that when, to avoid the cold that
began to pierce me, I went into the wretched inn, and sat down on the
hearth to think over the position, two of the yokels accompanied me;
and when I went out again, and stood looking distrustfully up and down
the road, two more were at my elbow, as by magic. Whether I turned
this way or that, one was sure to spring up, and, if I walked too far
from the house, would touch me on the arm, and gruffly order me back.
Mont Aigoual itself, lifting its crest, bleak, and stern, and cold,
above the valley, was not more sure than their attendance, or more
immovable.

This added to my irritation, and for a time I was like a madman.
Deluded by Madame St. Alais, and robbed by Froment--who, I felt sure,
had taken my place, and was now rolling at his ease through Sumne and
Ganges with my commission in his pocket--I strode up and down the
road, the road that was my prison, in a fever of rage and chagrin.
Madame's ingratitude, my own easiness, the villagers' stupidity, I
execrated all in turn; but most, perhaps, the inaction to which they
condemned me. I had escaped with my life, and for that should have
been thankful; but no man cares to be duped. And one day, two days,
three days passed; it froze and thawed, snowed and was fine; still,
while the carriage bowled along the road to Nmes, and carried my
mistress farther and farther from me, I lay a prisoner in this
wretched hamlet. I grew to loathe the squalid inn, in which I kicked
my heels through the cold hours, the muddy road that ran by it, the
mean row of hovels they called the village. All day, and whenever I
went abroad, the clowns dogged and flouted me, thinking it sport; each
evening the Committee came to stare and question. A house this way, a
house that way, were my boundaries, while the world moved beyond the
mountains, and France throbbed; and I knew not what might be in hand
to separate Denise from me. No wonder that I almost chafed myself into
madness.

I had left my horse at Milhau, whence the landlord had undertaken to
forward it to Ganges within a couple of days, by the hand of an
acquaintance who would be going that way. I expected it every hour,
therefore, and my only hope was that its conductor might be able to
identify me, since half a hundred at Milhau had seen my commission, or
heard it read. But the horse did not arrive, nor any one from Milhau,
and fearing that the release of the two ladies had caused trouble
there, my heart sank still lower. I could not easily communicate with
Cahors, and the Committee, with rustic independence and obstinacy,
would neither let me go nor send me to Nmes, where I could be
identified. It was in vain I pressed them.

"No, no," the sour-faced Committee-man answered, the first time I
raised the question. "Presently some one who knows you will come by.
In the meantime have patience."

"M. le Vicomte is a gentleman many would know," the woman of the house
chimed in; looking at me with her arms wrapped up in her apron and her
head on one side.

"To be sure! To be sure," the crowd agreed, and, rubbing their calves,
the members of the Committee followed her lead, and looked at me with
satisfaction, as at something that did them credit.

Their stupid complacency nearly drove me mad; but to what purpose?
"After all, you are very well here," the first speaker would say,
shrugging his shoulders. "You are very well here."

"Better than under the hay!" the man who had pricked my leg was wont
to answer.

And on that--this was a nightly joke--a general laugh would follow,
and with another admonition to be patient, the Committee would take
its leave.

Or sometimes the argument in the kitchen took a harsher and more
dangerous turn; and one and another would recall for my benefit old
tales of the dragooning, and Villars, and Berwick; tales, at which the
blood crept, of horrible cruelties done and suffered, of stern
mountain men and brave women who faced the worst that Kings could do,
for the fate that they had chosen; of a great cause crushed but not
destroyed, of a whole people trodden down in dust and blood, and yet
living and growing strong.

"And do you think that after this," the speaker would cry when he had
told me these things with flashing eyes, these things that his
grandfathers had done and suffered--"do you think that after this we
are not concerned in this business? Do you think that now, Monsieur,
when, after all these years, vengeance is in our hand and our
persecutors are tottering, we will sit still and see them set up
again? Bishops and captains, canons and cardinals, where are they now?
Where are the lands they stole from us? Gone from them! Where are the
tithes they took with blood? Taken from them! Where is St. Etienne,
whose father they persecuted? With his foot on their necks! And, after
this, do you think that with all their processions and their idols and
their Corpus Christi, they shall defy us and set up their rule again?
No, Monsieur, no."

"But there is no question of that!" I said mildly.

"There is great question of that," was the stern answer. "In Nmes and
Montauban, at Avignon, and at Arles! We who live in the mountains have
too often heard the storm gathering in the plain to be mistaken. These
preachings and processions, and weeping virgins, this cry of
Blasphemy--what do they mean, Monsieur? Blood! Blood! Blood! It has
been so a score of times, it is so now! But this time blood will not
be shed on one side only!"

And I listened and marvelled. I began to understand that the same word
meant one thing in one man's mouth, and in another man's mouth another
thing; and that that which worked easily and smoothly in the north
might in the south roll hideously through fire and blood. In Quercy we
had lost two or three chteaux, and a handful of lives, and for a few
hours the mob had got out of hand--all with little enthusiasm. But
here--here I seemed to stand on the brink of a great furnace under
which the fires of persecution still smouldered; I felt the scorching
breath of passion on my cheek, and saw through the white-hot scum old
enmities seething with new and fiercer ambitions, old factions with
new bigotries. I had heard Froment, now I heard these; it remained
only to be seen whether Froment had his followers.

In the meantime, pent up in this place, I found little comfort in such
predictions; I lived on my heart, and the better part of a fortnight
went by. The woman at the inn was well satisfied to keep me; I paid,
and guests were rare. And the Committee took pride in me; I was a
living, walking token of their powers, and of the importance of their
village. Now to the mingled misery and absurdity of my position, the
anxiety on Mademoiselle's account, which this news of Nmes caused me,
added the last intolerable touch, and I determined at all risks to
escape.

That I had no horse, and that at Sumne or Ganges I should inevitably
be detained, had hitherto held me back from the attempt; now I could
bear the position no longer, and after weighing all the chances, I
determined to slip away some evening at sunset, and make my way on
foot to Milhau. The villagers would be sure to pursue me in the
direction of Nmes, whither they knew that I was bound; and even if a
party took the other road, I should have many chances of escape in the
darkness. I counted on reaching Milhau soon after daybreak, and there,
if the Mayor stood my friend, I might regain my horse, and with
credentials travel to Nmes by the same or another road.

It seemed feasible, and that very evening fortune favoured me. The man
who should have kept me company, upset a pot of boiling water over his
foot, and without giving a thought to me or his duty went off groaning
to his house. A moment later the woman of the inn was called out by a
neighbour, and at the very hour I would have chosen, I found myself
alone. Still I knew that I had not a moment to lose; instantly,
therefore, I put on my cloak, and reaching down my pistols from a
shelf on which they had been placed, I put a little food in my pocket
and sneaked out at the rear of the house. A dog was kennelled there,
but it knew me and wagged its tail; and in two minutes, after warily
skirting the backs of the houses, I gained the road to Milhau, and
stood free and alone.

Night had fallen, but it was not quite dark; and dreading every eye, I
hurried on through the dusk, now peering anxiously forward, and now
looking and listening for the first sounds of pursuit. For a few
minutes the fear of that took up all my thoughts; later, when the one
twinkling light that marked the village had set behind me, and night
and the silent waste of mountains had swallowed me up, a sense of
eeriness, of loneliness, very depressing, took possession of me.
Denise was at Nmes, and I was moving the other way; what accidents
might not befall me, how many things might not happen to postpone my
return? In the meantime she lay at the mercy of her mother and
brothers, with all the traditions of her family, all the prejudices of
maidenhood and her education against my suit. To what use in this
imbroglio might not her hand be put? Or, if that were not in question,
what in that city of strife, in that fierce struggle, of which the
peasants had forewarned me, might not be the fate of a young girl?

Spurred by these thoughts, I pressed on feverishly, and had gone,
perhaps, a league, when a sharp sound made by a horse's shoe striking
a stone, caught my ear. It came from the front, and I drew to the side
of the road, and crouched low to let the traveller go by. I fancied
that I could distinguish the tramp of three horses, but when the men
loomed darkly into sight, I could see only two figures.

Perhaps I rose a little too high in my anxiety to see. At any rate I
had not counted on the horses, the nearer of which, as it passed me,
swerved violently from me. The rider was almost dismounted by the
violence of the movement, but in a twinkling had his horse again in
hand, and before I knew what I was doing, was urging it upon me. I
dared not move, for to move was to betray my presence, but this did
not avail, for in a minute the rider made out the outline of my
figure.

"Hola," he cried sharply. "Who are you there, who lie in wait to break
men's necks? Speak, man, or----"

But I caught his bridle. "M. de Gol!" I cried, my heart beating
against my ribs.

"Stand back!" he cried, peering at me. He did not know my voice. "Who
are you? Who is it?"

"It is I, M. de Saux," I answered joyfully.

"Why, man, I thought that you were at Nmes," he exclaimed in a tone
of great astonishment, "these ten days past! We have your horse here."

"Here? My horse?"

"To be sure. Your good friend here has it in charge from Milhau. But
where have you been? And what are you doing here?" he continued
suspiciously.

"I lost my passport. It was stolen by Froment."

He whistled.

"And at Villeraugues they stopped me," I continued. "I have been there
since."

"Ah," he said drily. "That comes of travelling in bad company, M. le
Vicomte. And to-night I suppose you were----"

"Going to get away," I answered bluntly. "But you--I thought that you
had passed long ago?"

"No," he said. "I was detained. Now we have met, I would advise you to
mount and return with me."

"I will," I said briskly, "with the greatest pleasure. And you will be
able to tell them who I am."

"I?" he answered. "No, indeed. I do not know. I only know who you told
me you were."

I fell to earth again, and for a moment stood staring through the
darkness at him. A moment only. For then out of the darkness came a
voice. "Have no fear, M. le Vicomte, I will speak for you."

I started and stared. "_Mon Dieu!_" I said, trembling. "Who spoke?"

"It is I--Buton," came the answer. "I have your horse, M. le Vicomte."

It was Buton, the blacksmith; Captain Buton, of the Committee.

                          *   *   *   *   *

This for the time cut the thread of my difficulties. When we rode into
the village ten minutes later, the Committee, awed by the credentials
which Buton carried, accepted his explanation at once, and raised no
further objection to my journey. So twelve hours afterwards we three,
thus strangely thrown together, passed through Sumne. We slept at
Sauve, and presently leaving behind us the late winter of the
mountains, with its frost and snow, began to descend in sunshine the
western slope of the Rhone valley. All day we rode through balmy air,
between fields and gardens and olive groves; the white dust, the white
houses, the white cliffs eloquent of the south. And a little before
sunset we came in sight of Nmes, and hailed the end of a journey
that, for me, had not been without its adventures.




                             CHAPTER XIX.

                              AT NMES.


It will be believed that I looked on the city with no common emotions.
I had heard enough at Villeraugues--and to that enough M. de Gol had
added by the way a thousand details--to satisfy me that here and not
in the north, here in the Gard, and the Bouches du Rhone, among the
olive groves and white dust of the south, and not among the
wheatfields and pastures of the north, the fate of the nation hung in
the balance; and that not in Paris--where men would and yet would not,
where Mirabeau and Lafayette, in fear of the mob, took one day a step
towards the King, and the next, fearful lest restored he should
punish, retraced it--could the convulsion be arrested, but here! Here,
where the warm imagination of the Provenal still saw something holy
in things once holy, and faction bound men to faith.

Hitherto the stream of revolution had met with no check. Obstacles
apparently the strongest, the King, the nobles, had crumbled and sunk
before it, almost without a struggle; it remained to be seen whether
the third and last of the governing powers, the Church, would fare
better. Clearly, if Froment were right, and faith must be met by
faith, and bigotry of one kind be opposed by bigotry of another kind,
here in the valley of the Rhone, where the Church still kept its hold,
lay the materials nearest to the enthusiast's hand. In that case--and
with this in my mind, I took my first long look at the city, and the
wide low plain that lay beyond it, bathed in the sunset light--in that
case, from this spot might fly a torch to kindle France! Hence might
start within the next few days a conflagration as wide as the land;
that taken up, and roaring ever higher and higher through all La
Vende, and Brittany, and the Ctes du Nord, might swiftly ring round
Paris with a circle of flame.

Once get it fairly alight. But there lay the doubt; and I looked
again, and looked with eager curiosity, at this city from which so
much was expected; this far-stretching city of flat roofs and white
houses, trending gently down from the last spurs of the Cevennes to
the Rhone plain. North of it, in the outskirts rose three low hills,
the midmost crowned with a tower, the eastern-most casting a shadow
almost to the distant river; and from these, eastward and southward,
the city sloped. And these hills, and the roads near us, and the plain
already verdant, and the great workshops that here and there rose in
the faubourgs, all, as we approached, seemed to teem with life and
people; with people coming and going, alone and in groups, sauntering
beyond the walls for pleasure, or hastening on business.

Of these, I noticed all wore a badge of some kind; many the tricolour,
but more a red ribbon, a red tuft, a red cockade--emblems at sight of
which my companions' faces grew darker, and ever darker. Another thing
characteristic of the place, the tinkling of many bells, calling to
vespers--though I found the sound fall pleasantly on the evening
air--was as little to their taste. They growled together, and
increased their pace; the result of which was that insensibly I fell
to the rear. As we entered the streets, the traffic that met us, and
the keenness with which I looked about me, increased the distance
between us; presently, a long line of carts and a company of National
Guards intervening, I found myself riding alone, a hundred paces
behind them.

I was not sorry; the novelty of the shifting crowd, the changing
faces, the southern patois, the moving string of soldiers, peasants,
workmen, women, amused me. I was less sorry when by-and-by
something--something which I had dimly imagined might happen when I
reached Nmes--took real shape, there, in the crooked street; and
struck me, as it were, in the face. As I passed under a barred window
a little above the roadway, a window on which my eyes alighted for an
instant, a white hand waved a handkerchief--for an instant only, just
long enough for me to take in the action and think of Denise! Then, as
I jerked the reins, the handkerchief was gone, the window was empty,
on either side of me the crowd chattered, and jostled on its way.

I pulled up mechanically, and looked round, my heart beating. I could
see no one near me for whom the signal could be intended; and yet--it
seemed odd. I could hardly believe in such good fortune; or that I had
found Denise so soon. However, as my eyes returned doubtfully to the
window, the handkerchief flickered in it again; and this time the
signal was so unmistakably meant for me that, shamed out of my
prudence, I pushed my horse through the crowd to the door, and hastily
dismounting, threw the rein to an urchin who stood near. I was shy of
asking him who lived in the house; and with a single glance at the
dull white front, and the row of barred windows that ran below the
balcony, I resigned myself to fortune, and knocked.

On the instant the door flew open, and a servant appeared. I had not
considered what I would say, and for a moment I stared at him
foolishly. Then, at a venture, on the spur of the moment, I asked if
Madame received.

He answered very civilly that she did, and held the door open for me
to enter.

I did so, confused and wondering; none the less when, having crossed a
spacious hall, paved with black and white marble, and followed him up
a staircase, I found everything I saw round me, from the man's quiet
livery to the mouldings of the ceiling, wearing the stamp of elegance
and refinement. Pedestals, supporting marble busts, stood in the
angles of the staircase; there were orange trees in jars in the hall,
and antique fragments adorned the walls. However, I saw these only in
passing; in a moment I reached the head of the stairs, and the man
opening a door, stood aside.

I entered the room, my eyes shining; in a dream, an impossible dream,
that held possession of me for one moment, that Denise--not
Mademoiselle de St. Alais, but Denise, the girl who loved me and with
whom I had never been alone, might be there to receive me. Instead, a
stranger rose slowly from a seat in one of the window bays, and, after
a moment's hesitation, came forward to meet me; a strange lady, tall,
grave, and very handsome, whose dark eyes scanned me seriously, while
the blood rose a little to her pure olive cheek.

Seeing that she was a stranger, I began to stammer an apology for my
intrusion. She curtsied. "Monsieur need not excuse himself," she said,
smiling. "He was expected, and a meal is ready. If you will allow
Gervais," she continued, "he will take you to a room, where you can
remove the dust of the road."

"But, Madame," I stammered, still hesitating. "I am afraid that I am
trespassing."

She shook her head, smiling. "Be so good," she said; and waved her
hand towards the door.

"But my horse," I answered, standing bewildered. "I have left it in
the street."

"It will be cared for," she said. "Will you be so kind?" And she
pointed with a little imperious gesture to the door.

I went then in utter amazement. The man who had led me upstairs was
outside. He preceded me along a wide airy passage to a bedroom, in
which I found all that I needed to refresh my toilet. He took my coat
and hat, and attended me with the skill of one trained to such
offices; and in a state of desperate bewilderment, I suffered it. But
when, recovering a little from my confusion, I opened my mouth to ask
a question, he begged me to excuse him; Madame would explain.

"Madame----?" I said; and looked at him interrogatively, and waited
for him to fill the blank.

"Yes, Monsieur, Madame will explain," he answered glibly, and without
a smile; and then, seeing that I was ready, he led me back, not to the
room I had left, but to another.

I went in, like a man in a dream; not doubting, however, that now I
should have an answer to the riddle. But I found none. The room was
spacious, and parquet-floored, with three high narrow windows, of
which one, partly open, let in the murmur of the street. A small wood
fire burned on a wide hearth between carved marble pillars; and in one
corner of the room stood a harpsichord, harp, and music-stand. Nearer
the fire a small round table, daintily laid for supper, and lighted by
candles, placed in old silver sconces, presented a charming picture;
and by it stood the lady I had seen.

"Are you cold?" she said, coming forward frankly, as I advanced.

"No, Madame."

"Then we will sit down at once," she answered. And she pointed to the
table.

I took the seat she indicated, and saw with astonishment that covers
were laid for two only. She caught the look, and blushed faintly, and
her lip trembled as if with the effort to suppress a smile. But she
said nothing, and any thought to her disadvantage which might have
entered my mind was anticipated, not only by the sedate courtesy of
her manner, but by the appearance of the room, the show of wealth and
ease that surrounded her, and the very respectability of the butler
who waited on us.

"Have you ridden far to-day?" she said, crumbling a roll with her
fingers as if she were not quite free from nervousness; and looking
now at the table and now again at me in a way almost appealing.

"From Sauve, Madame," I answered.

"Ah! And you propose to go?"

"No farther."

"I am glad to hear it," she said, with a charming smile. "You are a
stranger in Nmes?"

"I was. I do not feel so now."

"Thank you," she answered, her eyes meeting mine without reserve.
"That you may feel more at home, I am going presently to tell you my
name. Yours I do not ask."

"You do not know it?" I cried.

"No," she said, laughing; and I saw, as she laughed, that she was
younger than I had thought; that she was little more than a girl. "Of
course, you can tell it me if you please," she added lightly.

"Then, Madame, I do please," I answered gallantly. "I am the Vicomte
de Saux, of Saux by Cahors, and am very much at your service."

She held her hand suspended, and stared at me a moment in undisguised
astonishment. I even thought that I read something like terror in her
eyes. Then she said: "Of Saux by Cahors?"

"Yes, Madame. And I am driven to fear," I continued, seeing the effect
my words produced, "that I am here in the place of some one else."

"Oh, no!" she said. Then, her feelings seeming to find sudden vent,
she laughed and clapped her hands. "No, Monsieur," she cried gaily,
"there is no error, I assure you. On the contrary, now I know who you
are, I will give you a toast. Alphonse! Fill M. le Vicomte's glass,
and then leave us! So! Now, M. le Vicomte," she continued, "you must
drink with me, _ l'Anglaise_, to----"

She paused and looked at me slily. "I am all attention, Madame," I
said, bowing.

"To _la belle_ Denise!" she said.

It was my turn to start and stare now; in confusion as well as
surprise. But she only laughed the more, and, clapping her hands with
childish abandon, bade me, "Drink, Monsieur, drink!"

I did so bravely, though I coloured under her eyes.

"That is well," she said, as I set down the glass. "Now, Monsieur, I
shall be able--in the proper quarter--to report you no recreant."

"But, Madame," I said, "how do you know the proper quarter?"

"How do I know?" she answered navely. "Ah, that is the question."

But she did not answer it; though I remarked that from this moment she
took a different tone with me. She dropped much of the reserve which
she had hitherto maintained, and began to pour upon me a fire of wit
and badinage, merriment and _plaisanterie_, against which I defended
myself as well as I could, where all the advantage of knowledge lay
with her. Such a duel with so fair an antagonist had its charms, the
more as Denise and my relations to her formed the main objects of her
raillery: yet I was not sorry when a clock, striking eight, produced a
sudden silence and a change in her, as great as that which had
preceded it. Her face grew almost sombre, she sighed, and sat looking
gravely before her. I ventured to ask if anything ailed her.

"Only this, Monsieur," she answered. "That I must now put you to the
test; and you may fail me."

"You wish me to do something?"

"I wish you to give me your escort," she answered, "to a place and
back again."

"I am ready," I cried, rising gaily. "If I were not I should be a
recreant indeed. But I think, Madame, that you were going to tell me
your name."

"I am Madame Catinot," she answered. And then--I do not know what she
read in my face, "I am a widow," she added, blushing deeply. "For the
rest you are no wiser."

"But always at your service, Madame."

"So be it," she answered quietly. "I will meet you, M. le Vicomte, in
the hall, if you will presently descend thither."

I held the door for her to go out, and she went; and wondering, and
inexpressibly puzzled by the strangeness of the adventure, I paced up
and down the room a minute, and then followed her. A hanging lamp
which lit the hall showed her to me standing at the foot of the
stairs; her hair hidden by a black lace mantilla, her dress under a
cloak of the same dark colour. The man who had admitted me gave me in
silence my cloak and hat; and without a word Madame led the way along
a passage.

Over a door at the end of the passage was a second light. It fell on
my hat--as I was about to put it on--and I started and stood. Instead
of the tricolour I had been wearing in the hat, I saw a small red
cockade!

Madame heard me stop, and turning, discovered what was the matter. She
laid her hand on my arm; and the hand trembled. "For an hour,
Monsieur, only for an hour," she breathed in my ear. "Give me your
arm."

Somewhat agitated--I began to scent danger and complications--I put on
the hat and gave her my arm, and in a moment we stood in the open air
in a dark, narrow passage between high walls. She turned at once to
the left, and we walked in silence a hundred, or a hundred and fifty,
paces, which brought us to a low-browed doorway on the same side,
through which a light poured out. Madame guiding me by a slight
pressure, we passed through this, and a narrow vestibule beyond it;
and in a moment I found myself, to my astonishment, in a church, half
full of silent worshippers.

Madame enjoined silence by laying her finger on her lip, and led the
way along one of the dim aisles, until we came to a vacant chair
beside a pillar. She signed to me to stand by the pillar, and herself
knelt down.

Left at liberty to survey the scene, and form my conclusions, I looked
about me like a man in a dream. The body of the church, faintly lit,
was rendered more gloomy by the black cloaks and veils of the vast
kneeling crowd that filled the nave and grew each moment more dense.
The men for the most part stood beside pillars, or at the back of the
church; and from these parts came now and then a low stern muttering,
the only sound that broke the heavy silence. A red lamp burning before
the altar added one touch of sombre colour to the scene.

I had not stood long before I felt the silence, and the crowd, and the
empty vastnesses above us, begin to weigh me down; before my heart
began to beat quickly in expectation of I knew not what. And then at
last, when this feeling had grown almost intolerable, out of the
silence about the altar came the first melancholy notes, the wailing
refrain of the psalm, _Miserere Domine!_

It had a solemn and wondrous effect as it rose and fell, in the gloom,
in the silence, above the heads of the kneeling multitude, who one
moment were there and the next, as the lights sank, were gone, leaving
only blackness and emptiness and space--and that spasmodic wailing. As
the pleading, almost desperate notes, floated down the long aisles,
borne on the palpitating hearts of the listeners, a hand seemed to
grasp the throat, the eyes grew dim, strong men's heads bowed lower,
and strong men's hands trembled. _Miserere mei Deus! Miserere Domine!_

At last it came to an end. The psalm died down, and on the darkness
and dead silence that succeeded, a light flared up suddenly in one
place, and showed a pale, keen face and eyes that burned, as they
gazed, not at the dim crowd, but into the empty space above them,
whence grim, carved visages peered vaguely out of fretted vaults. And
the preacher began to preach.

In a low voice at first, and with little emotion, he spoke of the ways
of God with His creatures, of the immensity of the past and the
littleness of the present, of the Omnipotence before which time and
space and men were nothing; of the certainty that as God, the
Almighty, the Everlasting, the Ever-present decreed, it _was_. And
then, in fuller tones, he went on to speak of the Church, God's agent
on earth, and of the work which it had done in past ages, converting,
protecting, shielding the weak, staying the strong, baptising,
marrying, burying. God's handmaid, God's vicegerent. "Of whom alone it
comes," the preacher continued, raising his hand now, and speaking in
a voice that throbbed louder and fuller through the spaces of the
church, "that we are more than animals, that knowing who is behind the
veil we fear not temporal things, nor think of death as the worst
possible, as do the unbelieving; but having that on which we rest,
outside and beyond the world, can view unmoved the worst that the
world can do to us. We believe; therefore, we are strong. We believe
in God; therefore, we are stronger than the world. We believe in God;
therefore, we are of God, and not of the world. We are above the
world! we are about the world, and in the strength of God, who is the
God of Hosts, shall subdue the world."

He paused, holding the crowd breathless; then in a lower tone he
continued: "Yet how do the heathen rage and the people imagine a vain
thing? They trample on God! They say this exists, I see it. That
exists, I hear it. The other exists, I touch it. And that is all--that
is all. But does it come of what we see and hear and feel that a man
will die for his brother? Does it come of what we see and hear
and feel that a man will die for a thought? That he will die for a
creed? That he will die for honour? That, withal, he will die for
anything--for anything, while he may live? I trow not. It comes of
God! Of God only.

"And they trample on Him. In the streets, in the senate, in high
places. And He says, 'Who is on My side?' My children, my brethren, we
have lived long in a time of ease and safety; we have been long
untried by aught but the ordinary troubles of life, untrained by the
imminent issues of life and death. Now, in these late years of the
world, it has pleased the Almighty to try us; and who is on His side?
Who is prepared to put the unseen before the seen, honour before life,
God before man, chivalry before baseness, the Church before the world?
Who is on His side? Spurned in this little corner of His creation,
bruised and bleeding and trampled under foot, yet ruler of earth and
heaven, life and death, judgment and eternity, ruler of all the
countless worlds of space, He comes! He comes! He comes, God Almighty,
which was, and is, and is to be! And who is on His side?"

As the last word fell from his lips, and the light above his head went
suddenly out, and darkness fell on the breathless hush, the listening
hundreds, an indescribable wave of emotion passed through the crowd.
Men stirred their feet with a strange, stern sound, that spreading,
passed in muttered thunder to the vaults; while women sobbed, and here
and there shrieked and prayed aloud. From the altar a priest in a
voice that shook with feeling blessed the congregation; then, even as
I awoke from a trance of attention, Madame touched my arm, and signed
to me to follow her, and gliding quickly from her place, led the way
down the aisle. Before the preacher's last words had ceased to ring in
my ears or my heart had forgotten to be moved, we were walking under
the stars with the night air cooling our faces; a moment, and we were
in the house and stood again in the lighted salon where I had first
found Madame Catinot.

Before I knew what she was going to do, she turned to me with a swift
movement, and laid both her bare hands on my arm; and I saw that the
tears were running down her face. "Who is on My side?" she cried, in a
voice that thrilled me to the soul, so that I started where I stood.
"Who is on My side? Oh, surely you! Surely you, Monsieur, whose
fathers' swords were drawn for God and the King! Who, born to guide,
are surely on the side of light! Who, noble, will never leave the task
of government to the base! O----" and there, breaking off before I
could answer, she turned from me with her hands clasped to her face.
"O God!" she cried with sobs, "give me this man for Thy service."

I stood inexpressibly troubled; moved by the sight of this woman in
tears, shaken by the conflict in my own soul, somewhat unmanned,
perhaps, by what I had seen. For a moment I could not speak; when I
did, "Madame," I said unsteadily, "if I had known that it was for
this! You have been kind to me, and I--I can make no return."

"Don't say it!" she cried, turning to me and pleading with me. "Don't
say it!" And she laid her clasped hands on my arm and looked at me,
and then in a moment smiled through her tears. "Forgive me," she said
humbly, "forgive me. I went about it wrongly. I feel--too much. I
asked too quickly. But you will? You will, Monsieur? You will be
worthy of yourself?"

I groaned. "I hold their commission," I said.

"Return it!"

"But that will not acquit me!"

"Who is on My side?" she said softly. "Who is on My side?"

I drew a deep breath. In the silence of the room, the wood-ashes on
the hearth settled down, and a clock ticked. "For God! For God and the
King!" she said, looking up at me with shining eyes, with clasped
hands.

I could have sworn in my pain. "To what purpose?" I cried almost
rudely. "If I were to say, yes, to what purpose, Madame? What could I
do that would help you? What could I do that would avail?"

"Everything! Everything! You are one man more!" she cried. "One man
more for the right. Listen, Monsieur. You do not know what is afoot,
or how we are pressed, or----"

She stopped suddenly, abruptly; and looked at me, listening; listening
with a new expression on her face. The door was not closed, and the
voice of a man, speaking in the hall below, came up the staircase;
another instant, and a quick foot crossed the hall, and sounded on the
stairs. The man was coming up.

Madame, face to face with me, dumb and listening with distended eyes,
stood a moment, as if taken by surprise. At the last moment, warning
me by a gesture to be silent, she swept to the door and went out,
closing it--not quite closing it behind her.

I judged that the man had almost reached it, for I heard him exclaim
in surprise at her sudden appearance; then he said something in a tone
which did not reach me. I lost her answer too, but his next words were
audible enough.

"You will not open the door?" he cried.

"Not of that room," she replied bravely. "You can see me in the other,
my friend."

Then silence. I could almost hear them breathing. I could picture them
looking defiance at one another. I grew hot.

"Oh, this is intolerable!" he cried at last. "This is not to be borne.
Are you to receive every stranger that comes to town? Are you to be
closeted with them, and sup with them, and sit with them, while I eat
my heart out outside? Am I--I _will_ go in!"

"You shall not!" she cried; but I thought that the indignation in her
voice rang false; that laughter underlay it. "It is enough that you
insult me," she continued proudly. "But if you dare to touch me, or if
you insult him----"

"Him!" he cried fiercely. "Him, indeed! Madame, I tell you at once, I
have borne enough. I have suffered this more than once, but----"

But I had no longer any doubt, and before he could add the next word I
was at the door--I had snatched it open, and stood before him. Madame
fell back with a cry between tears and laughter, and we stood, looking
at one another.

The man was Louis St. Alais.




                             CHAPTER XX.

                             THE SEARCH.


I had not seen Louis since the day of the duel at Cahors, when,
parting from him at the door in the passage by the Cathedral, I had
refused to take his hand. Then I had been sorely angry with him. But
time and old memories and crowding events had long softened the
feeling; and in the joy of meeting him again, of finding him in this
unexpected stranger, nothing was further from my thoughts than to rake
up old grudges. I held out my hand, therefore, with a laughing word.
"_Voil l'Inconnu_, Monsieur!" I said with a bow. "I am here to find
you, and I find you!"

He stared at me a moment in the utmost astonishment, and then
impulsively grasping my hand he held it, and stood looking at me, with
the old affection in his eyes. "Adrien! Adrien!" he said, much moved.
"Is it really you?"

"Even so, Monsieur."

"And here?"

"Here," I said.

Then, to my astonishment, he slowly dropped my hand; and his manner
and his face changed--as a house changes when the shutters are closed.
"I am sorry for it," he said slowly, and after a long pause. And then,
with an unmistakable flash of anger, "My God, Monsieur! Why have you
come?" he cried.

"Why have I come?"

"Ay, why?" he repeated bitterly. "Why? Why have you come--to trouble
us? You do not know what evil you are doing! You do not know, man!"

"I know at least what good I am seeking," I answered, purely astounded
by this sudden and inexplicable change. "I have made no secret of
that, and I make no secret of it now. No man was ever worse treated
than I have been by your family. Your attitude now impels me to say
that. But when I see Madame la Marquise, to-morrow, I shall tell her
that it will take more than this to change me. I shall tell her----"

"You will not see her!" he answered.

"But I shall!"

"You will not!" he retorted.

Before I could answer, Madame Catinot interposed. "Oh, no more!" she
cried in a voice which sufficiently evinced her distress. "I thought
that you and he were friends, M. Louis? And now--now that fortune has
brought you together again----"

"Would to heaven it had not!" he cried, dropping his hand like a man
in despair. And he took a turn this way and that on the floor.

She looked at him. "I do not think that you have ever spoken to me in
that tone before, Monsieur," she said in a tone of keen reproach. "If
it is due--if, I mean," she continued quietly, but with a sparkling
eye, "it is because you found M. le Vicomte with me, you infer
something unworthy of us. You insult me as well as your friend!"

"Heaven forbid!" he exclaimed.

But she was roused. "That is not enough," she answered firmly and
proudly. "For one week more, this is my house, M. Louis. After that it
will be yours. Perhaps then--perhaps then," she continued, with a
pitiful break in her voice, "I shall think of to-night, and wonder I
took no warning! Perhaps then, Monsieur, a word of kindness from you
may be as rare as a rough word now!"

He was not proof against that, and the sadness in her voice. He threw
himself on his knees before her and seized her hands. "Madame!
Catherine! forgive me!" he cried passionately, kissing her hands again
and again, and taking no heed of me at all. "Forgive me!" he
continued, "I am miserable! You are my only comfort, my only
compensation. I do not know, since I saw him, what I am saying.
Forgive me!"

"I do!" she said hastily. "Rise, Monsieur!" and she furtively wiped
away a tear, then looked at me, blushing but happy. "I do," she
continued. "But, _mon cher_, I do not understand you. The other day
you spoke so kindly of M. de Saux; and of--pardon me--your sister, and
of other things. To-day M. de Saux is here, and you are unhappy."

"I am!" he said, casting a haggard, miserable look at me.

I shrugged my shoulders and spoke up. "So be it," I said proudly. "But
because I have lost a friend, Monsieur, it does not follow that I need
lose a mistress. I have come to Nmes to win Mademoiselle de St.
Alais' hand. I shall not leave until I have won it."

"This is madness!" he said, with a groan. "Why?"

"Because you talk of the impossible," he answered. "Because Madame de
St. Alais is not at Nmes--for you."

"She is at Nmes!"

"You will have to find her."

"That is childishness!" I said. "Do you mean to say that at the first
hotel I enter I shall not be told where Madame has her lodging?"

"Neither at the first, nor at the last."

"She is in retreat?"

"I shall not tell you."

With that we stood facing one another; Madame Catinot watching us a
little aside. Clearly the events of the last few months, which had so
changed, so hardened Madame St. Alais, had not been lost on Louis. I
could fancy, as I confronted him, that it was M. le Marquis, the
elder, and not the younger brother, who withstood me; only--only from
under Louis' mask of defiance, there peeped, I still fancied, the old
Louis' face, doubting and miserable.

I tried that chord. "Come," I said, making an effort to swallow my
wrath, and speak reasonably, "I think that you are not in earnest, M.
le Comte, in what you say, and that we are both heated. Time was when
we agreed well enough, and you were not unwilling to have me for your
brother-in-law. Are we, because of these miserable differences----"

"Differences!" he cried, interrupting me harshly. "My mother's house
in Cahors is an empty shell. My brother's house at St. Alais is a heap
of ashes. And you talk of differences!"

"Well, call them what you like!"

"Besides," Madame Catinot interposed quickly, "pardon me,
Monsieur--besides, M. St. Alais, you know our need of converts. M. le
Vicomte is a gentleman, and a man of sense and religion. It needs but
a little--a very little," she continued, smiling faintly at me, "to
persuade him. And if your sister's hand would do that little, and
Madame were agreeable?"

"He could not have it!" he answered sullenly, looking away from me.

"But a week ago," Madame Catinot answered in a startled tone, "you
told me----"

"A week ago is not now," he said. "For the rest, I have only this to
say. I am sorry to see you here, M. le Vicomte, and I beg you to
return. You can do no good, and you may do and suffer harm. By no
possibility can you gain what you seek."

"That remains to be seen," I answered stubbornly, roused in my turn.
"To begin with, since you say that I cannot find Mademoiselle, I shall
adopt a very simple plan. I shall wait here until you leave, Monsieur,
and then accompany you home."

"You will not!" he said.

"You may depend upon it I shall!" I answered defiantly.

But Madame interposed. "No, M. de Saux," she said with dignity. "You
will not do that; I am sure that you will not; it would be an abuse of
my hospitality."

"If you forbid it?"

"I do," she answered.

"Then, Madame, I cannot," I replied. "But----"

"But nothing! Let there be a truce now, if you please," she said
firmly. "If it is to be war between you, it shall not begin here. I
think, too--I think that I had better ask you to retire," she
continued, with an appealing glance at me.

I looked at Louis. But he had turned away, and affected to ignore me.
And on that I succumbed. It was impossible to answer Madame, when she
spoke to me in that way; and equally impossible to remain in the
house, against her will. I bowed, therefore, in silence; and with the
best grace I could, though I was sore and angry, I took my cloak and
hat, which I had laid on a chair.

"I am sorry," Madame said kindly. And she held out her hand.

I raised it to my lips. "To-morrow--at twelve--here!" she breathed.

I started. I rather guessed than heard the words, so softly were they
spoken; but her eyes made up for the lack of sound, and I understood.
The next moment she turned from me, and with a last reluctant glance
at Louis, who still had his back to me, I went out.

The man who had admitted me was in the hall. "You will find your horse
at the Louvre, Monsieur," he said, as he opened the door.

I rewarded him, and going out, without a thought whither I was going,
walked along the street, plunged in reflection; until marching on
blindly I came against a man. That awoke me, and I looked round. I had
been in the house little more than three hours, and in Nmes scarcely
longer; yet so much had happened in the time that it seemed strange to
me to find the streets unfamiliar, to find myself alone in them, at a
loss which way to turn. Though it was hard on ten o'clock, and only a
swaying lantern here and there made a ring of smoky light at the
meeting of four ways, there were numbers of people still abroad; a few
standing, but the majority going one way, the men with cloaks about
their necks, the women with muffled heads.

Feeling the necessity, since I must get myself a lodging, of putting
away for the moment my one absorbing thought--the question of Louis'
behaviour--I stopped a man who was not going with the stream, and
asked him the way to the Htel de Louvre. I learned not only that but
the cause of the concourse.

"There has been a procession," he answered gruffly. "I should have
thought that you would know that!" he added, with a glance at my hat.
And he turned on his heel.

I remembered the red cockade I wore, and before I went farther paused
to take it out. As I moved on again, a man came quickly up behind me,
and as he passed thrust a paper into my hand. Before I could speak he
was gone; but the incident and the bustle of the streets, strange at
this late hour, helped to divert my thoughts; and I was not surprised
when, on reaching the inn, I was told that every room was full.

"My horse is here," I said, thinking that the landlord, seeing me walk
in on foot, might distrust the weight of my purse.

"Yes, Monsieur; and if you like you can lie in the eating-room," he
answered very civilly. "You are welcome, and you will do no better
elsewhere. It is as if the fair were being held at Beaucaire. The city
is full of strangers. Almost as full as it is of those things!" he
continued querulously, and he pointed to the paper in my hand.

I looked at it, and saw that it was a manifesto headed "_Sacrilege!
Mary Weeps!_" "It was thrust into my hand a minute ago," I said.

"To be sure," he answered. "One morning we got up and found the walls
white with them. Another day they were flying loose about the
streets."

"Do you know," I asked, seeing that he had been supping, and was
inclined to talk, "where the Marquis de St. Alais is living?"

"No, Monsieur," he said. "I do not know the gentleman."

"But he is here with his family."

"Who is not here," he answered, shrugging his shoulders. Then in a
lower tone, "Is he red, or--or the other thing, Monsieur?"

"Red," I said boldly.

"Ah! Well, there have been two or three gentlemen going to and fro
between our M. Froment, and Turin and Montpellier. It is said that our
Mayor would have arrested them long ago if he had done his duty. But
he is red too, and most of the councillors. And I don't know, for I
take no side. Perhaps the gentleman you want is one of these?"

"Very likely," I said. "So M. Froment is here?"

"Monsieur knows him?"

"Yes," I said drily, "a little."

"Well, he is here, or he is not," the landlord answered, shaking his
head. "It is impossible to say."

"Why?" I asked. "Does he not live here?"

"Yes, he lives here; at the Port d'Auguste on the old wall near the
Capuchins. But----" he looked round and then continued mysteriously,
"he goes out, where he has never gone in, Monsieur! And he has a house
in the Amphitheatre, and it is the same there. And some say that the
Capuchins is only another house of his. And if you go to the Cabaret
de la Vierge, and give his name--you pay nothing."

He said this with many nods, and then seemed on a sudden to think that
he had said too much, and hurried away. Asking for them, I learned
that M. de Gol and Buton, failing to get a room there, had gone to
the Ecu de France; but I was not very sorry to be rid of them for the
time, and accepting the host's offer, I went to the eating-room, and
there made myself as comfortable as two hard chairs and the excitement
of my thoughts permitted.

The one thing, the one subject that absorbed me was Louis' behaviour,
and the strange and abrupt change I had marked in it. He had been glad
to see me, his hand had leaped to meet mine, I had read the old
affection in his eyes; and then--then on a sudden, in a moment he had
frozen into surly, churlish antagonism, an antagonism that had taken
Madame Catinot by surprise, and was not without a touch of remorse,
almost of horror. It could not be that she was dead? It could not be
that Denise--no, my mind failed to entertain it. But I rose, trembling
at the thought, and paced the room until daylight; listening to the
watchman's cry, and the mournful hours, and the occasional rush of
hurrying feet, that spoke of the perturbed city. What to me were
Froment, or the red or the white or the tricolour, veto or no veto,
endowment or disendowment, in comparison to that?

The house stirred at last, but I had still to wait till noon before I
could see Madame Catinot. I spent the interval in an aimless walk
through the town. At another time the things I saw must have filled me
with wonder; at another time the hoary, gloomy ring of the Arnes,
rising in tiers of frowning arches, high above the squalid roofs that
leaned against it--and choked within by a Ghetto of the like, huddled
where prefects once sat, and the Emperor's colours flew victorious
round the circle--must have won my admiration by its vastness; the
Maison Carre by its fair proportions; the streets by the teeming
crowds that filled them, and stood about the cabarets, and read the
placards on the walls. But I had only thought for Louis, and my love,
and the lagging minutes. At the first stroke of twelve I knocked at
Madame Catinot's door; the last saw me in her presence.

It needed but a look at her face, and my heart sank; the thanks I was
preparing to utter died on my lips as I gazed at her. She on her part
was agitated. For a moment we were both silent.

At last, "I see that you have bad news for me, Madame," I said,
striving to smile, and bear myself bravely.

"The worst, I fear," she said pitifully, smoothing her skirt. "For I
have none, Monsieur."

"Yet I have heard it said that no news is good news?" I said,
wondering.

Her lip trembled, but she did not look at me.

"Come, Madame," I persisted, though I was sick at heart. "Surely you
are going to tell me more than that? At least you can tell me where I
can see Madame St. Alais."

"No, Monsieur, I cannot tell you," she said in a low voice.

"Nor why M. Louis has so suddenly become hostile to me?"

"No, Monsieur, nor that. And I beg--as you are a gentleman," she
continued hurriedly, "that you will spare me questions! I thought that
I could help you, and I asked you to see me to-day. I find that I can
only give you pain."

"And that is all, Madame?"

"That is all," she said, with a gesture that told more than her words.

I looked round the silent room, I walked half way to the door. And
then I turned back. I could not go. "No!" I cried vehemently, "I will
not go so! What is it you have learned, that has closed your lips,
Madame? What are they plotting against her--that you fear to tell me?
Speak, Madame! You did not bring me here to hear this! That I know."

But she only looked at me, her face full of reproach. "Monsieur," she
said, "I meant kindly. Is this my reward?"

And that was too much for me. I turned without a word, and went
out--of the room and the house.

Outside I felt like a child in darkness, on whom the one door leading
to life and liberty had closed, as his hand touched it. I felt a dead,
numbing disappointment that at any moment might develop into sharp
pain. This change in Madame Catinot, resembling so exactly the change
in Louis St. Alais, what could be the cause of it? What had been
revealed to her? What was the mystery, the plot, the danger that made
them all turn from me, as if I had the plague?

For awhile I was in the depths of despair. Then the warm sunshine that
filled the streets, and spoke of coming summer, kindled lighter
thoughts. After all it could not be hard to find a person in Nmes! I
had soon found M. Louis. And this was the eighteenth century and not
the sixteenth. Women were no longer exposed to the pressure that had
once been brought to bear on them; nor men to the violence natural in
old feuds.

And then--as I thought of that and strove to comfort myself with it--I
heard a noise burst into the street behind me, a roar of voices and a
sudden trampling of hundreds of feet; and turning I saw a dense press
of men coming towards me, waving aloft blue banners, and crucifixes,
and flags with the Five Wounds. Some were singing and some shouting,
all were brandishing clubs and weapons. They came along at a good
pace, filling the street from wall to wall; and to avoid them I
stepped into an archway, that opportunely presented itself.

They came up in a moment, and swept past me with deafening shouts. It
was difficult to see more than a forest of waving arms and staves over
swart excited faces; but through a break in the ranks I caught a
glimpse of three men walking in the heart of the crowd, quiet
themselves, yet the cause and centre of all; and the middle man of the
three was Froment. One of the others wore a cassock, and the third had
a reckless air, and a hat cocked in the military fashion. So much I
saw, then only rank upon rank of hurrying shouting men. After these
again followed three or four hundred of the scum of the city, beggars
and broken rascals and homeless men.

As I turned from staring after them I found a man at my elbow; by a
strange coincidence the very same man who, the night before, had
directed me to the Htel de Louvre. I asked him if that was not M.
Froment.

"Yes," he said with a sneer. "And his brother."

"Oh, his brother! What is his name, Monsieur?"

"Bully Froment, some call him."

"And what are they going to do?"

"Groan outside a Protestant church to-day," he answered pithily.
"To-morrow break the windows. The next day, or as soon as they can get
their courage to the sticking point, fire on the worshippers, and call
in the garrison from Montpellier. After that the refugees from Turin
will come, we shall be in revolt, and there will be dragoonings. And
then--if the Cevennols don't step in--Monsieur will see strange
things."

"But the Mayor?" I said. "And the National Guards? Will they suffer
it?"

"The first is red," the man answered curtly. "And two-thirds of the
last. Monsieur will see."

And with a cool nod he went on his way; while I stood a moment looking
idly after the procession. On a sudden, as I stood, it occurred to me
that where Froment was, the St. Alais might be; and snatching at the
idea, wondering hugely that I had not had it before, I started
recklessly in pursuit of the mob. The last broken wave of the crowd
was still visible, eddying round a distant corner; and even after that
disappeared, it was easy to trace the course it had taken by closed
shutters and scared faces peeping from windows. I heard the mob stop
once, and groan and howl; but before I came up with it it was on
again, and when I at last overtook it, where one of the streets,
before narrowing to an old gateway, opened out into a little
square--with high dingy buildings on this side and that, and a
meshwork of alleys running into it--the nucleus of the crowd had
vanished, and the fringe was melting this way and that.

My aim was Froment, and I had missed him. But I was at a loss only for
a moment, for as I stood and scanned the people trooping back into the
town, my eye alighted on a lean figure with stooping head and a scanty
cassock, that, wishing to cross the street, paused a moment striving
to pass athwart the crowd. It needed a glance only; then, with a cry
of joy, I was through the press, and at the man's side.

It was Father Benit! For a moment we could not speak. Then, as we
looked at one another, the first hasty joyful words spoken, I saw the
very expression of dismay and discomfiture, which I had read on Louis
St. Alais' face, dawn on his! He muttered, "_O mon Dieu! mon Dieu!_"
under his breath, and wrung his hands stealthily.

But I was sick of this mystery, and I said so in hot words. "You at
any rate shall tell me, father!" I cried.

Two or three of the passers-by heard me, and looked at us curiously.
He drew me, to escape these, into a doorway; but still a man stood
peering in at us. "Come upstairs," the father muttered, "we shall be
quiet there." And he led the way up a stone staircase, ancient and
sordid, serving many and cleaned by none.

"Do you live here?" I said.

"Yes," he answered; and then stopped short, and turned to me with an
air of confusion. "But it is a poor place, M. le Vicomte," he
continued, and he even made as if he would descend again, "and perhaps
we should be wise to go----"

"No, no!" I said, burning with impatience. "To your room, man! To your
room, if you live here! I cannot wait. I have found you, and I will
not let another minute pass before I have learned the truth."

He still hesitated, and even began to mutter another objection. But I
had only mind for one thing, and giving way to me, he preceded me
slowly to the top of the house; where under the tiles he had a little
room with a mattress and a chair, two or three books and a crucifix. A
small square dormer-window admitted the light--and something else; for
as we entered a pigeon rose from the floor and flew out by it.

He uttered an exclamation of annoyance, and explained that he fed them
sometimes. "They are company," he said sadly. "And I have found little
here."

"Yet you came of your own accord," I retorted brutally. I was choking
with anxiety, and it took that form.

"To lose one more illusion," he answered. "For years--you know it, M.
le Vicomte--I looked forward to reform, to liberty, to freedom. And I
taught others to look forward also. Well, we gained these--you know
it, and the first use the people made of their liberty was to attack
religion. Then I came here, because I was told that here the defenders
of the Church would make a stand; that here the Church was strong,
religion respected, faith still vigorous. I came to gain a little hope
from others' hope. And I find pretended miracles, I find imposture, I
find lies and trickery and chicanery used on one side and the other.
And violence everywhere."

"Then in heaven's name, man, why did you not go home again?" I cried.

"I was going a week ago," he answered. "And then I did not go.
And----"

"Never mind that now!" I cried harshly. "It is not that I want. I have
seen Louis St. Alais, and I know that there is something amiss. He
will not face me. He will not tell me where Madame is. He will have
nothing to do with me. He looks at me as if I were a death's head! Now
what is it? You know and I must know. Tell me."

"_Mon Dieu!_" he answered. And he looked at me with tears in his eyes.
Then, "This is what I feared," he said.

"Feared? Feared what?" I cried.

"That your heart was in it, M. le Vicomte."

"In what? In what? Speak plainly, man."

"Mademoiselle de St. Alais'--engagement," he said.

I stood a moment staring at him. "Her engagement?" I whispered. "To
whom?"

"To M. Froment," he answered.




                             CHAPTER XXI.

                               RIVALS.


"It is impossible!" I said slowly. "Froment! It is impossible!"

But even while I said it, I knew that I lied; and I turned to the
window that Benit might not see my face. Froment! The name alone, now
that the hint was supplied, let in the light. Fellow-traveller,
fellow-conspirator, in turn protected and protector, his face as I had
seen it at the carriage door in the pass by Villeraugues, rose up
before me, and I marvelled that I had not guessed the secret earlier.
A bourgeois and ambitious, thrown into Mademoiselle's company, what
could be more certain than that, sooner or later, he would lift his
eyes to her? What more likely than that Madame St. Alais, impoverished
and embittered, afloat on the whirlpool of agitation, would be willing
to reward his daring even with her daughter's hand? Rich already,
success would ennoble him; for the rest I knew how the man, strong
where so many were weak, resolute where a hundred faltered, assured of
his purpose and steadfast in pursuing it, where others knew none, must
loom in a woman's eyes. And I gnashed my teeth.

I had my eyes fixed, as I thought these thoughts, on a little dingy,
well-like court that lay below his window, and on the farther side of
which, but far below me, a monastic-looking porch surmounted by a
carved figure, formed the centre of vision. Mechanically, though I
could have sworn that my whole mind was otherwise engaged, I watched
two men come into the court, and go to this porch. They did not knock
or call, but one of them struck his stick twice on the pavement; in a
second or two the door opened, as of itself, and the men disappeared.

I saw and noted this unconsciously; yet, in all probability, it was
the closing of the door roused me from my thoughts. "Froment!" I said,
"Froment!" And then I turned from the window. "Where is she?" I said
hoarsely.

Father Benit shook his head.

"You must know!" I cried--indeed I saw that he did. "You must know!"

"I do know," he answered slowly, his eyes on mine. "But I cannot tell
you. I could not, were it to save your life, M. le Vicomte. I had it
in confession."

I stared at him baffled; and my heart sank at that answer, as it would
have sunk at no other. I knew that on this door, this iron door
without a key, I might beat my hands and spend my fury until the end
of time and go no farther. At length, "Then why--why have you told me
so much?" I cried, with a harsh laugh. "Why tell me anything?"

"Because I would have you leave Nmes," Father Benit answered gently,
laying his hand on my arm, his eyes full of entreaty. "Mademoiselle is
contracted, and beyond your reach. Within a few hours, certainly as
soon as the elections come on, there will be a rising here. I know
you," he continued, "and your feelings, and I know that your
sympathies will be with neither party. Why stay then, M. le Vicomte?"

"Why?" I said, so quickly that his hand fell from my arm as if I had
struck him. "Because until Mademoiselle is married I follow her, if it
be to Turin! Because M. Froment is unwise to mingle love and war, and
my sympathies are now with one side, and it is not his! It is not his!
Why, you ask? Because--you cannot tell me, but there are those who
can, and I go to them!"

And without waiting to hear answer or remonstrance--though he cried to
me and tried to detain me--I caught up my hat, and flew down the
stairs; and once out of the house and in the street hastened back at
the top of my speed to the quarter of the town I had left. The streets
through which I passed were still crowded, but wore an air not so much
of disorder as of expectation, as if the procession I had followed had
left a trail behind it. Here and there I saw soldiers patrolling, and
warning the people to be quiet; and everywhere knots of townsmen,
whispering and scowling, who stared at me as I passed. Every tenth
male I saw was a monk, Dominican or Capuchin, and though my whole mind
was bent on finding M. de Gol and Buton, and learning from them what
they knew, as enemies, of Froment's plans and strength, I felt that
the city was in an abnormal state; and that if I would do anything
before the convulsion took place, I must act quickly.

I was fortunate enough to find M. de Gol and Buton at their lodgings.
The former, whom I had not seen since our arrival, and who doubtless
had his opinion of the cause of my sudden disappearance in the street,
greeted me with a scowl and a bitter sarcasm, but when I had put a few
questions, and he found that I was in earnest, his manner changed.
"You may tell him," he said, nodding to Buton.

Then I saw that they too were excited, though they would fain hide it.
"What is it?" I asked.

"Froment's party rose at Avignon yesterday," he answered eagerly.
"Prematurely; and were crushed--crushed with heavy loss. The news has
just arrived. It may hasten his plans."

"I saw soldiers in the street," I said.

"Yes, the Calvinists have asked for protection. But, that, and the
patrols," De Gol answered with a grim smile, "are equally a farce.
The regiment of Guienne, which is patriotic and would assist us, and
even be some protection, is kept within barracks by its officers; the
mayor and municipals are red, and whatever happens will not hoist the
flag or call out the troops. The Catholic cabarets are alive with
armed men; in a word, my friend, if Froment succeeds in mastering the
town, and holding it three days, M. d'Artois, governor of Montpellier,
will be here with his garrison, and----"

"Yes!"

"And what was a riot will be a revolt," he said pithily. "But there is
many a slip between the cup and the lip, and there are more than sheep
in the Cevennes Mountains!"

The words had scarcely passed from his lips, when a man ran into the
room, looked at us, and raised his hand in a peculiar way. "Pardon
me," said M. de Gol quickly; and with a muttered word he followed the
man out. Buton was not a whit behind. In a moment I was alone.

I supposed they would return, and I waited impatiently; but a minute
or two passed, and they did not appear. At length, tired of waiting,
and wondering what was afoot, I went into the yard of the inn, and
thence into the street. Still I did not find them; but collected
before the inn I found a group of servants and others belonging to the
place. They were all standing silent, listening, and as I joined them
one looked round peevishly, and raised his hand as a warning to me to
be quiet.

Before I could ask what it meant, the distant report of a gun,
followed quickly by a second and a third, made my heart beat. A dull
sound, made, it might be, by men shouting, or the passage of a heavy
waggon over pavement, ensued; then more firing, each report short,
sharp, and decisive. While we listened, and as the last red glow of
sunset faded on the eaves above us, leaving the street cold and grey,
a bell somewhere began to toll hurriedly, stroke upon stroke; and a
man, dashing round a corner not far away, made towards us.

But the landlord of the Ecu did not wait for him. "All in!" he cried
to his people, "and close the great gates! And do you, Pierre, bar the
shutters. And you, Monsieur," he continued hurriedly, turning to me,
"will do well to come in also. The town is up, and the streets will
not be safe for strangers."

But I was already half-way down the street. I met the fugitive, and he
cried to me, as I passed, that the mob were coming. I met a
frightened, riderless horse, galloping madly along the kennel; it
swerved from me, and almost fell on the slippery pavement. But I took
no heed of either. I ran on until two hundred paces before me I saw
smoke and dust, and dimly through it a row of soldiers, who, with
their backs to me, were slowly giving way before a dense crowd that
pressed upon them. Even as I came in sight of them, they seemed to
break and melt away, and with a roar of triumph the mob swept over the
place on which they had stood.

I had the wit to see that to force my way past the crowd was
impossible; and I darted aside into a narrow passage darkened by wide
flat eaves that almost hid the pale evening sky. This brought me to a
lane, full of women, standing listening with scared faces. I hurried
through them, and when I had gone, as I judged, far enough to outflank
the mob, chose a lane that appeared to lead in the direction of Father
Benit's house. Fortunately, the crowd was engaged in the main
streets, the byways were comparatively deserted, and without accident
I reached the little square by the gate.

Probably the attack on the soldiers had begun there, or in that
neighbourhood, for a broken musket lay in two pieces on the pavement,
and pale faces at upper windows followed me in a strange unwinking
silence as I crossed the square. But no man was to be seen, and
unmolested I reached the door of Father Benit's staircase, and
entered.

In the open the light was still good, but within doors it was dusk,
and I had not taken two steps before I tripped and fell headlong over
some object that lay in my way. I struck the foot of the stairs
heavily, and got up groaning; but ceased to groan and held my breath,
as peering through the half light of the entry, I saw over what I had
fallen. It was a man's body.

The man was a monk, in the black and white robe of his order; and he
was quite dead. It took me an instant to overcome the horror of the
discovery, but that done, I saw easily enough how the corpse came to
be there. Doubtless the man had been shot in the street at the
beginning of the riot--perhaps he had been the first to attack the
patrol; and the body had been dragged into shelter here, while his
party swept on to vengeance.

I stooped and reverently adjusted the cowl which my foot had dragged
away; and that done--it was no time for sentiment--I turned from him,
and hurried up the stairs. Alas, when I reached Father Benit's room
it was empty.

Wondering what I should do next, I stood a moment in the failing
light. What could I do? Then I walked aimlessly to the casement and
looked out. In the dull, almost blind wall which met my eyes across
the court, was one window on a level with that at which I stood, but a
little to the side. On a sudden, as I stared stupidly at the wall near
it, a bright light shone out in this window. A lamp had been kindled
in the room; and darkly outlined against the glow I saw the head and
shoulders of a woman.

I almost screamed a name. It was Denise!

Even while I held my breath she moved from the window, a curtain was
drawn and all was dark. Only the plain lines of the window--and those
fast fading in the gloom--remained; only those and the gloomy,
well-like court, that separated me from her.

I leaned a moment on the sill, my heart bounding quickly, my thoughts
working with inconceivable rapidity. She was there, in the house
opposite! It seemed too wonderful; it seemed inexplicable. Then I
reflected that the house stood next to the old gate I had seen from
the street; and had not some one told me that Froment lived in the
Port d'Auguste?

Doubtless this was it; and she lay in his power in this house that
adjoined it and was one with it. I leaned farther out, partly that I
might cool my burning face, partly to see more; my eyes, greedily
scanning the front of the house, traced the line of arrow-slits that
marked the ascent of the staircase. I followed the line downwards; it
ended beside the porch surmounted by a little statue, at which I had
seen the two men enter.

They were still fighting in the town. I could hear the dull sound of
distant volleys, and the tolling of bells, and now and then a wave of
noise, of screams and yells, that rose and sank on the evening air.
But my eyes were on the porch below; and suddenly I had a thought. I
followed the line of arrow-slits up again--it was too dark in the
sombre court to see them well--and marked the position of the window
at which Denise had appeared. Then I turned, and passing through the
room, I groped my way downstairs.

I had no light, and I had to go carefully with one hand on the grimy
wall; but I knew now where the monk's body lay, and I stepped over it
safely, and to the door, and putting out my head, looked up and down.

Two men, as I did so, passed hurriedly through the little square, and,
before reaching the gate, dived into an entry on the right, and
disappeared. About the eaves of the highest house, that towered high
and black above me, a faint ruddy light was beginning to dance. I
heard voices, that came, I thought, from the tower of the gateway; and
there, too, I thought that I saw a figure outlined against the sky.
But otherwise, all was quiet in the neighbourhood; and I went in
again.

No matter what I did in the darkness at the foot of the stairs; I hate
to recall it. But in a minute or two I came out a monk in cowl and
girdle. Then I, too, dived into the entry, and in a trice found myself
in the court. Before me was the porch, and with the barrel of the
broken musket, which I had snatched up as I passed, I struck twice on
the pavement.

I had no time to think what would happen next, or what I was going to
confront. The door opened instantly, and I went in; as by magic the
door closed silently behind me.

I found myself in a long, bare hall or corridor, plain and
unfurnished, that had once perhaps been a cloister. A lighted lamp
hung against a wall, and opposite me, on a stone seat sat two persons
talking; three or four others were walking up and down. All paused at
my entrance, however, and looked at me eagerly. "Whence are you,
brother?" said one of them, advancing to me.

"The Cabaret Vierge," I answered at a venture. The light dazzled me,
and I raised my hand to ward it off.

"For the Chief?"

"Yes."

"Come, quickly then," the man said, "he is on the roof. It goes well?"
he continued, looking with a smile at my weapon.

"It goes," I answered, holding my head low, so that my face was lost
in the cowl.

"They are beginning to light up, I am told?"

"Yes."

He took up a small lamp, and opening a door in a kind of buttress that
strengthened one of the arches, he led the way through it, and up a
narrow winding staircase made in the thickness of the wall. Presently
we passed an open door, and I ticked it off in my mind. It led to the
rooms on the first floor from the ground. Twenty steps higher we
passed another door--closed this time. Again fifteen steps and we came
to a third. That floor held my heart, and I looked round greedily,
desperately, for some way of evading my guide and so reaching it. But
I saw only the smooth stones of the wall; and he continued to climb.

I halted half a dozen steps higher. "What is it?" he asked, looking
down at me.

"I have dropped a note," I said; and I began to grope about the steps.

"For the Chief?"

"Yes."

"Here, take the light!" he answered impatiently. "And be quick! if
your news is worth the telling, it is worth telling quickly. _Sacr!_
man, what have you done?"

I had let the lamp fall on the steps, extinguishing it; and we were in
darkness. In the moment of silence which followed, before he recovered
from his surprise, I could hear the voices of men above us, and the
tramp of their feet on the roof; and a cold draught of air met me. He
swore another oath. "Get down, get down!" he cried angrily, "and let
me pass you! You are a pretty messenger to--there wait; wait until I
fetch another light."

He squeezed by me, and left me standing in the very place I would have
chosen, in the angle of the doorway we had just passed; before he had
clattered down half a dozen steps I had my finger on the latch. To my
joy the door--which might so easily have been locked--yielded to my
knee, and passing through it, I closed it behind me. Then turning to
the right--all was still dark--I groped my way along the wall through
which I had entered. I knew it to be the outside wall, and dimly in
front I discerned the faint radiance of a window. Now that the moment
had come to put all to the test I was as calm as I could wish to be. I
counted ten paces, and came, as I expected, to the window; ten paces
farther and I felt my way barred by a door. This should be the
room--the last that way; listening intently for the first sounds of
pursuit or alarm, I felt about for a latch, found it, and tried the
door. Again fortune favoured me, it came to my hand; but instead of
light I found all dark as before; and then understood, as I struck
with some violence against a second door.

A stifled cry in a woman's voice came from beyond it: and some one
asked sharply, "Who is that?"

I gave no answer, but searched for the latch, found it, and in a
moment the door was opened. The light which poured out dazzled me for
a second or two; but while I stood blinking, under the lamp I had a
vision of two girls standing at bay, one behind the other, and the
nearer was Denise!

I stepped towards her with a cry of joy; she retreated with terror
written on her face. "What do you want?" she stammered as she
retreated. "You have made some mistake. We----"

Then I remembered the guise in which I stood, and the gun-barrel in my
hand, and I dashed back the cowl from my face; and in a moment--it was
of all surprises the most joyous, for I had not seen her since we sat
opposite one another in the carriage, and then only a word had passed
between us--in a moment she was in my arms, on my breast, and sobbing
with her head hidden, and my lips on her hair.

"They told me you were dead!" she cried. "They told me you were dead!"

Then I understood; and I held her to me, held her to me more and more
closely, and said--God knows what I said. And for the moment she let
me, and we forgot all else, our danger, the dark future, even the
woman who stood by. We had been plighted before, and it had been
nothing to us; now, with my lips on hers, and her arms clinging, I
knew that it was once for all, and that only death, if death, could
part us.

Alas! that was not so far from us that we could long ignore it. In a
minute or two she freed herself, and thrust me from her, her face pale
and red by turns, her eyes soft and shining in the lamplight. "How do
you come here, Monsieur?" she cried. "And in that dress?"

"To see you," I answered. And at the word, I stepped forward and would
have taken her in my arms again.

But she waved me back. "Oh, no, no!" she cried, shuddering. "Not now!
Do you know that they will kill you? Do you know that they will kill
you if they find you here? Go! Go! I beg of you, while you can."

"And leave you?"

"Yes, and leave me," she answered, with a gesture of despair. "I
implore you to do so."

"And leave you to Froment?" I cried again.

She looked at me in a different way, and with a little start. "You
know that?" she said.

"Yes," I answered.

"Then know this too, Monsieur," she replied, raising her head, and
meeting my eyes with the bravest look. "Know this too: that whatever
betide, I shall not, after this, marry him, nor any man but you!"

I would have fallen on my knees and kissed the hem of her gown for
that word, but she drew back, and passionately begged me to begone.
"This house is not safe for you," she said. "It is death, it is death,
Monsieur! My mother is merciless, my brother is here; and _he_--the
house is full of his sworn creatures. You escaped him hardly before;
if he finds you here now he will kill you."

"But if I need fear him so," I answered grimly,--for I saw, now that
she had ceased to blush, how pale and wan she was, and what dark marks
fear had painted under her eyes--child's eyes no longer, but a
woman's--"if I need fear him so, what of you? What of you,
Mademoiselle? Am I to leave you at his mercy?"

She looked at me with a strange gravity in her face; and answered me
so that I never forgot her answer. "Monsieur," she said, "was I afraid
on the roof of the house at St. Alais? And I have more to guard now.
Have no fear. There is a roof here, too, and I walk on it; nor shall
my husband ever have cause to blush for me."

"But I was there," I said quickly. Heaven knows why; it was a strange
thing to say. Yet she did not find it so.

"Yes," she said--and smiled; and with the smile, her face burned again
and her eyes grew soft, and all her dignity fled in a moment, and she
looked at me, drooping. And in an instant she was in my arms.

But only for a few seconds. Then she tore herself away almost in
anger. "Oh, go, go!" she cried. "If you love me, go, Monsieur."

"Swear," I said, "to put a handkerchief in your window if you want
help!"

"In my window?"

"I can see it from Father Benit's."

A gleam of joy lit up her face. "I will," she said. "Oh, God be
thanked that you are so near! I will. But I have Franoise, too, and
she is true to me. As long as I have her----"

She stopped with her lips apart, and the blood gone suddenly from her
cheeks; and we looked at one another. Alas, I had stayed too long!
There was a noise of feet coming along the passage, and a hubbub of
voices outside, and the clatter of a door hastily closed. I think for
a moment we scarcely breathed; and even after that it was her woman
who was the first to move. She sprang to the door and softly locked
it.

"It is vain!" Denise said in a harsh whisper; she leaned against the
table, her face as white as snow. "They will fetch my mother, and they
will kill you."

"There is no other door?" I muttered, staring round with hunted eyes,
and feeling for the first time the full danger of the course I had
taken.

She shook her head.

"What is that?" I cried, pointing to the farther end of the chamber,
where a bed stood in the alcove.

"A closet," the woman answered, almost with a sob. "Yes, yes,
Monsieur, they may not search. Quick, and I can lock it."

In such a case man acts on instinct. I heard the latch of the door
tried, and then some one knocked peremptorily; and so long I
hesitated. But a second knock followed on the first, and a voice I
knew cried imperatively: "Open, open, Franoise!" and I moved towards
the closet. The girl, distracted by the repeated summons and her
terror, hung a moment between me and the door of the room; but in the
end had to go to the latter, so that I drew the closet door upon
myself.

Then in a moment it came upon me that if, hiding there, I was found, I
should shame Denise; it darted through my brain that if, lurking there
behind the closed doors among her woman's things, I was caught, I
should harm her a hundred times more than if I stood out in the middle
of the floor and faced the worst. And with my face on fire at the mere
thought, I opened the door again, and stepped out; and was just in
time. For as the door of the room flew open, and M. de St. Alais
strode in and looked round, I was the first person he saw.

There were three or four men behind him; and among them the man whom I
had cheated on the stairs. But M. St. Alais' eyes blazing with wrath
caught mine, and held them; and the others were nothing to me.




                            CHAPTER XXII.

                           NOBLESSE OBLIGE.


Yet he was not the first to speak. One of the men behind him took a
step forward, and cried, "That is the man! See, he still has the
gun-barrel."

"Seize him, then," M. de St. Alais replied. "And take him from here!
Monsieur," he continued, addressing me grimly, and with a grim eye,
"whoever you are, when you undertook to be a spy you counted the cost,
I suppose? Take him away, my men!"

Two of the fellows strode forward, and in a moment seized my arms; and
in the surprise of M. de St. Alais' appearance and the astonishment
his words caused me, I made no resistance. But in such emergencies the
mind works quickly, and in a trice I recovered myself. "This is
nonsense, M. de St. Alais!" I said. "You know well that I am no spy.
You know why I am here. And for the matter of that----"

"I know nothing!" he answered.

"But----"

"I know nothing, I say!" he repeated, with a mocking gesture. "Except,
Monsieur, that we find you here in a monk's dress, when you are
clearly no monk. You had better have tried to swim the Rhone at flood,
than entered this house to-night--I tell you that! Now away with him!
His case will be dealt with below."

But this was too much. I wrested my hands from the men who held me,
and sprang back. "You lie!" I cried. "You know who I am, and why I am
here!"

"I do not know you," he answered stubbornly. "Nor do I know why you
are here. I once knew a man like you; that is true. But he was a
gentleman, and would have died before he would have saved himself by a
lie--by a trumped-up tale. Take him away. He has frightened
Mademoiselle to death. I suppose he found the door open, and slipped
in, and thought himself safe."

At last I understood what he meant, and that in his passion he would
sacrifice one rather than bring in his sister's name. Nay, I saw more;
that he viewed with a cruel exultation the dilemma in which he had
placed me; and my brow grew damp, as I looked round wildly, trying to
solve the question. I had the sounds of street fighting still in my
ears; I knew that men staking all in such a strife owned few scruples
and scant mercy. I could see that this man in particular was maddened
by the losses and humiliations which he had suffered; and I stood in
the way of his schemes. The risk existed, therefore, and was no mere
threat; it seemed foolish quixotism to run it.

And yet--and yet I hesitated. I even let the men urge me half-way
to the door; and then--heaven knows what I should have done or whether
I could have seen my way plainly--the knot was cut for me. With
a scream, Denise, who since her brother's entrance had leaned,
half-fainting, against the wall, sprang forward, and seized him by the
arm.

"No, no!" she cried in a choked voice. "No! You will not, you will not
do this! Have pity, have mercy! I----"

"Mademoiselle!" he said, cutting her short quietly, but with a gleam
of rage in his eyes. "You are overwrought, and forget yourself. The
scene has been too much for you. Here!" he continued sharply to the
maid, "take care of your mistress. The man is a spy, and not worthy of
her pity."

But Denise clung to him. "He is no spy!" she cried, in a voice that
went to my heart. "He is no spy, and you know it!"

"Hush, girl! Be silent!" he answered furiously.

But he had not counted on a change in her, beside which the change in
him was petty. "I will not!" she answered, "I will not!" and to my
astonishment, releasing the arm to which she had hitherto clung, and
shaking back from her face the hair which her violent movements had
loosened, she stood out and defied him. "I will not!" she cried. "He
is no spy, and you know it, Monsieur! He is my lover," she continued,
with a superb gesture, "and he came to see me. Do you understand? He
was contracted to me, and he came to see me!"

"Girl, are you mad?" he snarled in the breathless hush of the room,
the hush that followed as all looked at her.

"I am not mad," she answered, her eyes burning in her white face.

"Then if you feel no shame do you feel no fear?" he retorted in a
terrible voice.

"No!" she cried. "For I love! And I love him."

I will not say what I felt when I heard that, myself helpless. For one
thing, I was in so great a rage I scarcely knew what I felt; and for
another, the words were barely spoken before M. le Marquis seized the
girl roughly by the waist, and dragged her, screaming and resisting,
to the other end of the room.

This was the signal for a scene indescribable. I sprang forward to
protect her; in an instant the three men flung themselves upon me, and
bore me by sheer weight towards the door. St. Alais, foaming with
rage, shouted to them to remove me, while I called him coward, and
cursed him and strove desperately to get at him. For a moment I made
head against them all, though they were three to one; the maid's
screaming added to the uproar. Then the odds prevailed; and in a
minute they had me out, and had closed the door on her and her cries.

I was panting, breathless, furious. But the moment it was done and the
door shut, a kind of calm fell upon us. The men relaxed their hold on
me, and stood looking at me quietly; while I leaned against the wall,
and glowered at them. Then, "There, Monsieur, have no more of that!"
one of them said civilly enough. "Go peaceably, and we will be easy
with you; otherwise----"

"He is a cowardly hound!" I cried with a sob.

"Softly, Monsieur, softly."

There were five of them, for two had remained at the door. The passage
was dark, but they had a lantern, and we waited in silence two or
three minutes. Then the door opened a few inches, and the man who
seemed to be the leader went to it, and having received his orders,
returned.

"Forward!" he said. "In No. 6. And do you, Petitot, fetch the key."

The man named went off quickly, and we followed more slowly along the
corridor; the steady tramp of my guards, as they marched beside me,
awaking sullen echoes that rolled away before us. The yellow light of
the lantern showed a white-washed wall on either side, broken on the
right hand by a dull line of doors, as of cells. We halted presently
before one of these, and I thought that I was to be confined there;
and my courage rose, for I should still be near Denise. But the door,
when opened, disclosed only a little staircase which we descended in
single file, and so reached a bare corridor similar to that above.
Half-way along this we stopped again, beside an open window, through
which the night wind came in so strongly as to stir the hair, and
force the man who carried the lantern to shield the light under
his skirts. And not the night wind only; with it entered all the
noises of the night and the disturbed city; hoarse cries and cheers,
and the shrill monotonous jangle of bells, and now and then a
pistol-shot--noises that told only too eloquently what was passing
under the black veil that hid the chaos of streets and houses below
us. Nay, in one place the veil was rent, and through the gap a ruddy
column poured up from the roofs, dispersing sparks--the hot glare of
some great fire, that blazing in the heart of the city, seemed to make
the sky sharer in the deeds and horrors that lay beneath it.

The men with me pressed to the window, and peered through it, and
strained eyes and ears; and little wonder. Little wonder, too, that
the man who was responsible for all, and had staked all, walked the
roof above with tireless steps. For the struggle below was the one
great struggle of the world, the struggle that never ceases between
the old and the new: and it was being fought as it had been fought in
Nmes for centuries, savagely, ruthlessly, over kennels running with
blood. Nor could the issue be told; only, that as it was here, it was
likely to be through half of France. We who stood at that window,
looked into the darkness with actual eyes; but across the border at
Turin, and nearer at Sommires and Montpellier, thousands of Frenchmen
bearing the greatest names of France, watched also--watched with faces
turned to Nmes, and hearts as anxious as ours.

I gathered from the talk of those round me, that M. Froment had seized
the Arnes, and garrisoned it, and that the flames we saw were those
of one of the Protestant churches; that as yet the patriots, taken by
surprise, made little resistance, and that if the Reds could hold for
twenty-four hours longer what they had seized, the arrival of the
troops from Montpellier would then secure all, and at the same time
stamp the movement with the approval of the highest parties.

"But it was a near thing," one of the men muttered. "If we had
not been at their throats to-night, they would have been at ours
to-morrow!"

"And now, not half the companies have turned out."

"But the villages will come in in the morning," a third cried eagerly.
"They are to toll all the bells from here to the Rhone."

"Ay, but what if the Cevennols come in first? What then, man?"

No one had an answer to this, and all stood watching eagerly, until
the sound of footsteps approaching along the passage caused the men to
draw in their heads. "Here is the key," said the leader. "Now,
Monsieur!"

But it was not the key that disturbed us, nor Petitot, who had been
sent for it, but a very tall man, cloaked, and wearing his hat, who
came hastily along the corridor with three or four behind him. As he
approached he called out, "Is Buzeaud here?"

The man who had spoken before stood out respectfully. "Yes, Monsieur."

"Take half a dozen men, the stoutest you have downstairs," the new
comer answered--it was Froment himself--"and get as many more from the
Vierge, and barricade the street leading beside the barracks to the
Arsenal. You will find plenty of helpers. And occupy some of the
houses so as to command the street. And--But what is this?" he
continued, breaking off sharply, as his eyes, passing over the group,
stopped at me. "How does this gentleman come here? And in this dress?"

"M. le Marquis arrested him--upstairs."

"M. le Marquis?"

"Yes, Monsieur, and ordered him to be confined in No. 6 for the
present."

"Ah!"

"As a spy."

M. Froment whistled softly, and for a moment we looked at one another.
The wavering light of the lanterns, and perhaps the tension of the
man's feelings, deepened the harsh lines of his massive features, and
darkened the shadows about his eyes and mouth; but presently he drew a
deep breath, and smiled, as if something whimsical in the situation
struck him. "So we meet again, M. le Vicomte," he said with that. "I
remember now that I have something of yours. You have come for it, I
suppose?"

"Yes, Monsieur, I have come for it," I said defiantly, giving him back
look for look; and I saw that he understood.

"And M. le Marquis found you upstairs?"

"Yes."

"Ah!" For a moment he seemed to reflect. Then, turning to the
men. "Well, you can go, Buzeaud. I will be answerable for this
gentleman--who had better remove that masquerade. And do you," he
continued, addressing the two or three who had come with him, "wait
for me above. Tell M. Flandrin--it is my last word--that whatever
happens the Mayor must not raise the flag for the troops. He may tell
him what he pleases from me--that I will hang him from the highest
window of the tower, if he likes--but it must not be done. You
understand?"

"Yes, Monsieur."

"Then go. I will be with you presently."

They went, leaving a lantern on the floor; and in a moment Froment and
I were alone. I stood expectant, but he did not look at me. Instead,
he turned to the open window, and leaning on the sill, gazed into the
night, and so remained for some time silent; whether the orders he had
just given had really diverted his thoughts into another channel, or
he had not made up his mind how to treat me, I cannot determine. More
than once I heard him sigh, however; and at last he said abruptly,
"Only three companies have risen?"

I do not know what moved me, but I answered in the same spirit. "Out
of how many?" I said coolly.

"Thirteen," he answered. "We are out-numbered. But we moved first, we
have the upper hand, and we must keep it. And if the villagers come in
to-morrow----"

"And the Cevennols do not."

"Yes; and if the officers can hold the Guienne regiment within
barracks, and the Mayor does not hoist the flag, calling them out, and
the Calvinists do not surprise the Arsenal--I think we may be able to
do so."

"But the chances are?"

"Against us. The more need, Monsieur"--for the first time he turned
and looked at me with a sort of dark pride glowing in his face--"of a
man! For--do you know what we are fighting for down there? France!
France!" he continued bitterly, and letting his emotion appear, "and I
have a few hundred cutthroats and rascals and shavelings to do the
work, while all the time your fine gentlemen lie safe and warm across
the frontier, waiting to see what will happen! And I run risks, and
they hold the stakes! I kill the bear, and they take the skin. They
are safe, and if I fail I hang like Favras! Faugh! It is enough to
make a man turn patriot and cry '_Vive la Nation!_'"

He did not wait for my answer, but impatiently snatching up the
lantern, he made a sign to me to follow him, and led the way down the
passage. He had said not a word of my presence in the house, of my
position, of Mademoiselle St. Alais, or how he meant to deal with me;
and at the door, not knowing what was in his mind, I touched his
shoulder and stopped him.

"Pardon me," I said, with as much dignity as I could assume, "but I
should like to know what you are going to do with me, Monsieur. I need
not tell you that I did not enter this house as a spy----"

"You need tell me nothing," he answered, cutting me short with
rudeness. "And for what I am going to do with you, it can be told in
half a dozen words. I am going to keep you by me, that if the worst
comes of this--in which event I am not likely to see the week out--you
may protect Mademoiselle de St. Alais and convey her to a place of
safety. To that end your commission shall be restored to you; I have
it safe. If, on the other hand, we hold our own, and light the fire
that shall burn up these cold-blooded _pedants l bas_, then, M. le
Vicomte--I shall have a word to say to you. And we will talk of the
matter as gentlemen."

For a moment I stood dumb with astonishment. We were at the door of
the little staircase--by which I had descended--when he said this; and
as he spoke the last word, he turned, as expecting no answer, and
opened it, and set his foot on the lowest stair, casting the light of
the lantern before him. I plucked him by the sleeve, and he turned,
and faced me.

"M. Froment!" I muttered. And then for the life of me I could say no
more.

"There is no need for words," he said grandly.

"Are you sure--that you know all!" I muttered.

"I am sure that she loves you, and that she does not love me," he
answered with a curling lip and a ring of scorn in his voice. "And
besides that, I am sure of one thing only."

"Yes?"

"That within forty-eight hours blood will flow in every street of
Nmes, and Froment, the bourgeois, will be Froment le Baron--or
nothing! In the former case, we will talk. In the latter," and he
shrugged his shoulders with a gesture a little theatrical, "it will
not matter."

With the word he turned to the stairs, and I followed him up them and
across the upper corridor, and by the outer staircase, where I had
evaded my guide, and so to the roof, and from it by a short wooden
ladder to the leads of a tower; whence we overlooked, lying below us,
all the dim black chaos of Nmes, here rising in giant forms, rather
felt than seen, there a medley of hot lights and deep shadows, thrown
into relief by the glare of the burning church. In three places I
picked out a cresset shining, high up in the sky, as it were; one on
the rim of the Arnes, another on the roof of a distant church, a
third on a tower beyond the town. But for the most part the town was
now at rest. The riot had died down, the bells were silent, the wind
blew salt from the sea and cooled our faces.

There were a dozen cloaked figures on the leads, some gazing down in
silence, others walking to and fro, talking together; but in the
darkness it was impossible to recognise any one. Froment, after
receiving one or two reports, withdrew to the outer side of the tower
overlooking the country, and walked there alone, his head bowed, and
his hands behind him, a desire to preserve his dignity having more to
do with this, or I was mistaken, than any longing for solitude. Still,
the others respected his wishes, and following their example I seated
myself in an embrasure of the battlements, whence the fire, now
growing pale, could be seen.

What were the others' thoughts I cannot say. A muttered word apprised
me that Louis St. Alais was in command at the Arnes; and that M. le
Marquis waited only until success was assured to start for Sommires,
whence the commandant had promised a regiment of horse should Froment
be able to hold his own without them. The arrangement seemed to me to
be of the strangest; but the Emigrs, fearful of compromising the
King, and warned by the fate of Favras--who, deserted by his party,
had suffered for a similar conspiracy a few months before--were
nothing if not timid. And if those round me felt any indignation, they
did not express it.

The majority, however, were silent, or spoke only when some movement
in the town, some outcry or alarm, drew from them a few eager words;
and for myself, my thoughts were neither of the struggle below--where
both parties lay watching each other and waiting for the day--nor of
the morrow, nor even of Denise, but of Froment himself. If the aim of
the man had been to impress me, he had succeeded. Seated there in the
darkness, I felt his influence strong upon me; I felt the crisis as
and because he felt it. I thrilled with the excitement of the
gambler's last stake, because he had thrown the dice. I stood on the
giddy point on which he stood, and looked into the dark future, and
trembled for and with him. My eyes turned from others, and
involuntarily sought his tall figure where he walked alone; with as
little will on my part I paid him the homage due to the man who stands
unmoved on the brink, master of his soul, though death yawns for him.

About midnight there was a general movement to descend. I had eaten
nothing for twelve hours, and I had done much; and, notwithstanding
the dubious position in which I stood, appetite bade me go with the
rest. I went, therefore; and, following the stream, found myself a
minute later on the threshold of a long room, brilliantly lit with
lamps, and displaying tables laid with covers for sixty or more. I
fancied that at the farther end of the apartment, and through an
interval in the crowd of men before me, I caught a glimpse of women,
of jewels, of flashing eyes, and a waving fan; and if anything could
have added to the bewildering abruptness of the change from the dark,
wind-swept leads above to the gay and splendid scene before me it was
this. But I had scant time for reflection. Though I did not advance
far, the press, which separated me from the upper end of the room,
melted quickly, as one after another took his seat amid a hum of
conversation; and in a moment I found myself gazing straight at
Denise, who, white and wan, with a pitiful look in her eyes, sat
beside her mother at the uppermost table, a picture of silent woe.
Madame Catinot and two or three gentlemen and as many ladies were
seated with them.

Whether my eyes drew hers to me, or she glanced that way by chance, in
a moment she looked at me, and rose to her feet with a low gasping
cry, that I felt rather than heard. It was enough to lead Madame St.
Alais' eyes to me, and she too cried out; and in a trice, while a few
between us still talked unconscious, and the servants glided about, I
found all at that farther table staring at me, and myself the focus of
the room. Just then, unluckily, M. St. Alais, rather late, came in; of
course, he too saw me. I heard an oath behind me, but I was intent on
the farther table and Mademoiselle, and it was not until he laid his
hand on my arm that I turned sharply and saw him.

"Monsieur!" he cried, with another oath--and I saw that he was almost
choking with rage--with rage and surprise. "This is too much."

I looked at him in silence. The position was so perplexing that I
could not grasp it.

"How do I find you here?" he continued with violence and in a voice
that drew every eye in the room to me. He was white with anger. He had
left me a prisoner, he found me a guest.

"I hardly know myself," I answered. "But----"

"I do," said a voice behind M. St. Alais. "If you wish to know,
Marquis, M. de Saux is here at my invitation."

The speaker was Froment, who had just entered the room. St. Alais
turned, as if he had been stabbed. "Then I am not!" he cried.

"That is as you please," Froment said steadfastly.

"It is--and I do not please!" the Marquis retorted, with a scornful
glance, and in a tone that rang through the room. "I do not please!"

As I heard him, and felt myself the centre, under the lights,
of all those eyes, I could have fancied that I was again in the St.
Alais' _salon_, listening to the futile oath of the sword; and that
three-quarters of a year had not elapsed since that beginning of all
our troubles, But in a moment Froment's voice roused me from the
dream.

"Very well," he said gravely. "But I think that you forget----"

"It is you who forget," St. Alais cried wildly. "Or you do not
understand--or know--that this gentleman----"

"I forget nothing!" Froment replied with a darkening face. "Nothing,
except that we are keeping my guests waiting. Least of all, do I
forget the aid, Monsieur, which you have hitherto rendered me. But, M.
le Marquis," he continued, with dignity, "it is mine to command
to-night, and it is for me to make dispositions. I have made them, and
I must ask you to comply with them. I know that you will not fail me
at a pinch. I know, and these gentlemen know, that in misfortune you
would be my helper; but I believe also that, all going well, as it
does, you will not throw unnecessary obstacles in my way. Come,
Monsieur; this gentleman will not refuse to sit here. And we will sit
at Madame's table. Oblige me."

M. St. Alais' face was like night, but the other was a man, and his
tone was strenuous as well as courteous; and slowly and haughtily M.
le Marquis, who, I think, had never before in his life given way,
followed him to the farther end of the room. Left alone, I sat down
where I was, eyed curiously by those round me; and myself, finding
something still more curious in this strange banquet while Nmes
watched; this midnight merriment, while the dead still lay in the
streets, and the air quivered, and all the world of night hung,
listening for that which was to come.




                            CHAPTER XXIII.

                             THE CRISIS.


When the grey dawn, to which so many looked forward, broke slowly over
the waking city, it found on the leads of Froment's tower some pale
faces; perhaps some sinking hearts. That hour, when all life lacks
colour, and all things, the sky excepted, are black to the eye, tries
a man's courage to the uttermost; as the cold wind that blows with it
searches his body. Eyes that an hour before had sparkled over the
wine--for we had sat late and drunk to the King, the Church, the Red
Cockade, and M. d'Artois--grew thoughtful; men who, a little before,
had shown flushed faces, shivered as they peered into the mist, and
drew their cloaks more closely round them; and if the man was there,
who regarded the issue of the day with perfect indifference, he was
not of those near me.

Froment had preached faith, but the faith for the most part was down
in the street. There, I have no doubt, were many who believed, and
were ready to rush on death, or slay without pity. And there may have
been one or two of these with us. But in the main, the men who looked
down with me on Nmes that morning were hardy adventurers, or local
followers of Froment, or officers whose regiments had dismissed them,
or--but these were few--gentlemen, like St. Alais. All brave men, and
some heated with wine; but not Froment only had heard of Favras
hanged, of De Launay massacred, of Provost Flesselles shot in cold
blood! Others beside him could make a guess at the kind of vengeance
this strange new creature, La Nation, might take, being outraged: and
so, when the long-expected dawn appeared at last, and warmed the
eastern clouds, and leaping across the sea of mist which filled the
Rhone valley, tinged the western peaks with rosy light, and found us
watching, I saw no face among all the light fell on, that was not
serious, not one but had some haggard, wan, or careworn touch to mark
it mortal.

Save only Froment's. He, be the reason what it might, showed as the
light rose a countenance not merely resolute, but cheerful. Abandoning
the solitary habit he had maintained all night, he came forward to the
battlements overlooking the town, and talked and even jested, rallying
the faint-hearted, and taking success for granted. I have heard his
enemies say that he did this because it was his nature, because he
could not help it; because his vanity raised him, not only above the
ordinary passions of men, but above fear; because in the conceit of
acting his part to the admiration of all, he forgot that it was more
than a part, and tried all fortunes and ran all risks with as little
emotion as the actor who portrays the Cid, or takes poison in the part
of Mithridates.

But this seems to me to amount to no more than saying that he was not
only a very vain, but a very brave man. Which I admit. No one, indeed,
who saw him that morning could doubt it; or that, of a million, he was
the man best fitted to command in such an emergency; resolute,
undoubting, even gay, he reversed no orders, expressed no fears. When
the mist rolled away--a little after four--and let the smiling plain
be seen, and the city and the hills, and when from the direction of
the Rhone the first harsh jangle of bells smote the ear and stilled
the lark's song, he turned to his following with an air almost joyous.

"Come, gentlemen," he said gaily, and with head erect. "Let us be
stirring! They must not say that we lie close and fear to show
our heads abroad; or, having set others moving, are backward
ourselves--like the tonguesters and dreamers of their knavish
assembly, who, when they would take their King, set women in the front
rank to take the danger also! _Allons_, Messieurs! They brought him
from Versailles to Paris. We will escort him back! And to-day we take
the first step!"

Enthusiasm is of all things the most contagious. A murmur of assent
greeted his words; eyes that a moment before had been dull enough,
grew bright. "_A bas les Tratres!_" cried one. "_A bas le Tricolor!_"
cried another.

Froment raised his hand for silence. "No, Monsieur," he said quickly.
"On the contrary, we will have a tricolour of our own. _Vive le Roi!
Vive la Foi! Vive la Loi! Vivent les Trois!_"

The conceit took. A hundred voices shouted, "_Vivent les Trois!_" in
chorus. The words were taken up on lower roofs and at windows, and in
the streets below; until they passed noisily away, after the manner of
file-firing, into the distance.

Froment raised his hat gallantly. "Thank you, gentlemen," he said. "In
the King's name, in his Majesty's name, I thank you. Before we have
done, the Atlantic shall hear that cry, and La Manche re-echo it! And
the Rhone shall release what the Seine has taken! To Nmes and to you,
all France looks this day. For freedom! For freedom to live--shall
knaves and scriveners strangle her? For freedom to pray--they rob God,
and defile His temples! For freedom to walk abroad--the King of France
is a captive. Need I say more?"

"No! No!" they cried, waving hats and swords. "No! No!"

"Then I will not," he answered hardily. "I will use no more words! But
I will show that here at least, at Nmes at least, God and the King
are honoured, and their servants are free! Give me your escort,
gentlemen, and we will walk through the town and visit the King's
posts, and see if any here dare cry, '_A bas le Roi!_'"

They answered with a roar of assent and menace that shook the very
tower; and instantly trooping to the ladder, began to descend by it to
the roof of the house, and so to the staircase. Sitting on the
battlements of the tower, I watched them pass in a long stream across
the leads below, their hilts and buckles glittering in the sunshine,
their ribbons waving in the breeze, their voices sharp and high. I
thought them, as I watched, a gallant company; the greater part were
young, and all had a fine air; not without sympathy I saw them vanish
one by one in the head of the staircase, by which I had ascended. One
half had disappeared when I felt a touch on my arm, and found Froment,
the last to leave, standing by my side.

"You will stay here, Monsieur," he said, in an undertone of meaning,
his eyes lowered to meet mine; "if the worst happens, I need not
charge you to look to Mademoiselle."

"Worst or best, I will look to her," I answered.

"Thanks," he said, his lip curling, and an ugly light for an instant
flashing in his eyes. "But in the latter case I will look to her
myself. Don't forget, that if I win, we have still to talk, Monsieur!"

"Yet, God grant you may win!" I exclaimed involuntarily.

"You have faith in your swordsmanship?" he answered, with a slight
sneer; and then, in a different tone, he went on: "No, Monsieur, it is
not that. It is that you are a French gentleman. And as such I leave
Mademoiselle to your care without a qualm. God keep you!"

"And you," I said. And I saw him go after the others.

It was then about five o'clock. The sun was up, and the tower-roof,
left silent and in my sole possession, seemed so near the sky, seemed
so bright and peaceful and still, with the stillness of the early
morning which is akin to innocence, that I looked about me dazed. I
stood on a different plane from that of the world below, whence the
roar of greeting that hailed Froment's appearance came up harshly.
Another shout followed and another, that drove the affrighted pigeons
in a circling cloud high above the roofs; and then the wave of sound
began to roll away, moving with an indescribable note of menace
southward through the city. And I remained alone on my tower, raised
high above the strife.

Alone, with time to think; and to think some grim thoughts. Where now
was the sweet union of which half the nation had been dreaming for
weeks? Where the millennium of peace and fraternity to which Father
Benit, and the Syndics of Giron and Vlais, had looked forward? And
the abolition of divisions? And the rights of man? And the other ten
thousand blessings that philosophers and theorists had undertaken to
create--the nature of man notwithstanding--their systems once adopted?
Ay, where? From all the smiling country round came, for answer, the
clanging of importunate bells. From the streets below rose for answer
the sounds of riot and triumph. Along this or that road, winding
ribbon-like across the plain, hurried little flocks of men--now seen
for the first time--with glittering arms; and last and worst--when
some half-hour had elapsed, and I still watched--from a distant suburb
westward boomed out a sudden volley, and then dropping shots. The
pigeons still wheeled, in a shining, shifting cloud, above the roofs,
and the sparrows twittered round me, and on the tower, and on the roof
below, where a few domestics clustered, all was sunshine and quiet and
peace. But down in the streets, there, I knew that death was at work.

Still, for a time, I felt little excitement. It was early in the day;
I expected no immediate issue; and I listened almost carelessly,
following the train of thought I have traced, and gloomily comparing
this scene of strife with the brilliant promises of a few months
before. But little by little the anxiety of the servants who stood on
the roof below, infected me. I began to listen more acutely; and to
fancy that the tide of conflict was rolling nearer, that the cries and
shots came more quickly and sharply to the ear. At last, in a place
near the barracks, and not far off, I distinguished little puffs of
thin white smoke rising above the roofs, and twice a rattling volley
in the same quarter shook the windows. Then in one of the streets
immediately below me, the whole length of which was visible, I saw
people running--running towards me.

I called to the servants to know what it was.

"They are attacking the arsenal, Monsieur," one answered, shading his
eyes.

"Who?" I said.

But he only shrugged his shoulders and looked out more intently. I
followed his example, but for a time nothing happened; then on a
sudden, as if a door were opened that hitherto had shut off the noise,
a babel of shouts burst out and a great crowd entered the nearer end
of the street below me, and pouring along it with loud cries and
brandished arms--and a crucifix and a little body of monks in the
middle--swirled away round the farthest corner, and were gone. For
some time, however, I could still hear the burthen of their cries, and
trace it towards the barracks, whence the crackle of musketry came at
intervals; and I concluded that it was a reinforcement, and that
Froment had sent for it. After that, chancing to look down, I saw that
half the servants, below me, had vanished, and that figures were
beginning to skulk about the streets hitherto deserted; and I began to
tremble. The crisis had come sooner than I had thought.

I called to one of the men and asked him where the ladies were.

He looked up at me with a pale face. "I don't know, Monsieur," he
answered rapidly; and he looked away again.

"They are below?"

But he was watching too intently to answer, and only shook his head
impatiently. I was unwilling to leave my place on the roof, and I
called to him to take my compliments to Madame St. Alais and ask her
to ascend. It seemed strange that she had not done so, for women are
not generally lacking in the desire to see.

But the man was too frightened to think of any one but himself--I
fancy he was one of the cooks--and he did not move; while his
companions only cried: "Presently, presently, Monsieur!"

At that, however, I lost my temper; and, going to the ladder, I ran
down it, and strode towards them. "You rascals!" I cried. "Where are
the ladies?"

One or two turned to me with a start. "Pardon, Monsieur?"

"Where are the ladies?" I repeated impatiently.

"Ah! I did not understand!" the nearest answered glibly. "Gone to the
church to pray, Monsieur."

"To the church?"

"To be sure. By the Capuchins."

"And they are not here?"

"No, Monsieur," he answered, his eyes straying. "But--what is that?"

And, diverted by something, he skipped nimbly from me, his cheek a
shade paler. I followed him to the parapet, and looked over. The view
was not so wide as from the tower above, but the main street leading
southward could be seen, and it was full of people; of scattered
groups and handfuls, all coming towards us, some running, at an easy
pace, while others walked quickly, four or five abreast, and often
looked behind them.

The servants never doubted what it meant. In a trice the group broke
up. With a muttered, "We are beaten!" they ran pell-mell across the
sunny leads to the head of the staircase, and began to descend. I
waited awhile, looking and fearing; but the stream of fugitives ever
continued and increased, the pace grew quicker, the last comers looked
more frequently behind them and handled their arms; the din of
conflict, of yells, and cries, and shots, seemed to be approaching;
and in a moment I made up my mind to act. The staircase was clear now;
I ran quickly down it as far as the door on the upper floor, by which
I had entered the house that evening before. I tried this, but
recoiled; the door was locked. With a cry of vexation, my haste
growing feverish--for now, in the darkness of the staircase, I was in
ignorance what was happening, and pictured the worst--I went on,
descending round and round, until I reached the cloister-like hall, at
the bottom.

I found this choked with men, armed, grim-faced, and furious; and
beset by other men who still continued to pour in from the street. A
moment later and I should have found the staircase stopped by the
stream of people ascending; and I must have remained on the roof. As
it was, I could not for a minute or two force myself through the
press, but was thrust against a wall, and pinned there by the rush
inwards. Next me, however, I found one of the servants in like case,
and I seized him by the sleeve. "Where are the ladies?" I said. "Have
they returned? Are they here?"

"I don't know," he said, his eyes roving.

"Are they still at the church?"

"Monsieur, I don't know," he answered impatiently; and then seeing, I
think, the man for whom he was searching, he shook me off, with the
churlishness of fear, and, flinging himself into the crowd, was gone.

All the place was such a hurly-burly of men entering and leaving,
shouting orders, or forcing themselves through the press, that I
doubted what to do. Some were crying for Froment, others to close the
doors; one that all was lost, another to bring up the powder. The
disorder was enough to turn the brain, and for a minute I stood in the
heart of it, elbowed and pushed, and tossed this way and that. Where
were the women? Where were the women? The doubt distracted me. I
seized half a dozen of the nearest men, and asked them; but they only
cried out fiercely that they did not know--how should they?--and shook
me off savagely and escaped as the servant had. For all here, with a
few exceptions, were of the commoner sort. I could see nothing of
Froment, nothing of St. Alais or the leaders, and only one or two of
the gallants who had gone with them.

I do not think that I was ever in a more trying position. Denise might
be still at the church and in peril there; or she might be in the
streets exposed to dangers on which I dare not dwell; or, on the other
hand, she might be safe in the next room, or upstairs; or on the roof.
In the unutterable confusion, it was impossible to know or learn, or
even move quickly; my only hope seemed to be in Froment's return, but
after waiting a minute, which seemed a lifetime, in the hope of seeing
him, I lost patience and battled my way through the press to a door,
which appeared to lead to the main part of the house.

Passing through it, I found the same disorder ruling; here men,
bringing up powder from the cellars, blocked the passage; there others
appeared to be rifling the house. I had little hope of finding those
whom I sought below stairs; and after glancing this way and that
without result, I lighted on a staircase, and ascending quickly to the
second floor, hastened to Denise's room. The door was locked.

I hammered on it madly and called, and waited, and listened, and
called again; but I heard no sound from within; convinced at last. I
left it and tried the nearest doors. The two first were locked also,
and the rooms as silent; the third and fourth were open and empty. The
last I entered was a man's.

The task was no long one, and occupied less than a minute. But all the
time, while I rapped and listened and called, though the corridor in
which I moved was quiet as death and echoed my footsteps, the house
below rang with cries and shouts and hurrying feet; and I was in a
fever. Madame might be on the roof. I turned that way meaning to
ascend. Then I reflected that if I climbed to it I might find the
staircase blocked when I came to descend again; and, cursing my folly
for leaving the hall--simply because my quest had failed--I hurried
back to the stairs, and dashed recklessly down them, and, stemming as
well as I could the tide of people that surged and ebbed about the
lower floor, I fought my way back to the hall.

I was just in time. As I entered by one door Froment entered by the
other, with a little band of his braves; of whom several, I now
observed, wore green ribbons--the Artois colours. His great stature
raising him above the crowd of heads, I saw that he was wounded; a
little blood was running down his cheek, and his eyes shone with a
brilliance almost of madness. But he was still cool; he had still so
much the command, not only of himself, but of those round him, that
the commotion grew still and abated under his eye. In a moment men who
before had only tumbled over and embarrassed one another, flew to
their places; and, though the howling of a hostile mob could plainly
be heard at the end of the street, and it was clear that he had fallen
back before an overwhelming force, resolution seemed in a moment to
take the place of panic, and hope of despair.

Standing on the threshold, and pointing this way, and that, with a
discharged pistol which he held in his hand, he gave a few short,
sharp orders for the barricading of the door, and saw them carried
out, and sent this man to one post, and that man to another. Then, the
crowd, which had before cumbered the place, melting as if by magic, he
saw me forcing my way to him. And he beckoned to me.

If he played a part, then let me say, once for all, he played it
nobly. Even now, when I guessed that all was lost, I read no fear and
no envy in his face; and in what he said there was no ostentation.

"Get out quickly," he muttered, in an undertone, forestalling by a
hasty gesture the excited questions I had on my lips, "through yonder
door, and by the little postern at the foot of the other staircase. Go
by the east gate, and you will find horses at the St. Genevive
outside. It is all over here!" he added, wringing my hand hard, and
pushing me towards the door.

"But Mademoiselle?" I cried; and I told him that she was not in the
house.

"What?" he said, pausing and looking at me, with his face grown
suddenly dark. "Are you mad? Do you mean that she has gone out?"

"She is not here," I answered. "I am told that she went to the church
with Madame St. Alais, and has not returned."

"That beldam!" he exclaimed, with a terrible oath, and then, "God help
them!" he said--twice. And after a moment of silence, meeting my eyes
and reading the horror in them, he laughed harshly. "After all, what
matter?" he said recklessly. "We shall all go together! Let us go like
gentlemen. I did what I could. Do you hear that?"

He held up his hand, as a roar of musketry shook the house; and he
gave an order. The small windows had been stopped with paving stones,
the door made solid with the wall behind it; and daylight being shut
out, lamps had been lighted, which gave the long whitewashed,
stone-groined room a strange sombre look. Or it was the grim faces I
saw round me had that effect.

"I am afraid that the St. Alais are cut off in the Arnes," he said
coolly. "And they are not enough to man the walls. Those cursed
Cevennols have been too many for us. As for our friends--it is as I
expected; they have left me to die like a bull in the ring. Well, we
must die goring."

But in the midst of my admiration of his courage a kind of revulsion
seized me. "And Denise?" I said, grasping his arm fiercely. "Are we to
leave her to perish?"

He looked at me, his lip curling. "True," he said, with a sneering
smile. "I forgot. You are not of us."

"I am thinking of her!" I cried, raging. And in that moment I hated
him.

But his mood changed while he looked at me. "You are right, Monsieur,"
he said, in a different tone. "Go! There may be a chance; but the
church is by the Capuchins, and those dogs were baying round it when
we fell back. They are ten to one, or--still there may be a chance,"
he continued with decision. "Go, and if you find her, and escape, do
not forget Froment of Nmes."

"By the postern?" I said.

"Yes--take this," he answered; and abruptly drawing a pistol from his
pocket, he forced it on me. "Go, and I must go too. Good fortune,
Monsieur, and farewell. And you, bark away, you dogs!" he continued
bitterly, addressing the unconscious mob. "The bull is on foot yet,
and will toss some of you before the ring closes!"




                            CHAPTER XXIV.

                           THE MILLENNIUM.


With that word he thrust me towards the door that led to the inner
hall and the postern; and, knowing, as I did, that every moment I
delayed might stand for a life, and that within a minute or two at
most the rear of the building would be beset, and my chance of egress
lost, it was to be expected that I should not hesitate.

Yet I did. The main body of Froment's followers had flocked upstairs,
whence they could be heard firing from the roof and windows. He stood
almost alone in the middle of the floor; in the attitude of one
listening and thinking, while a group of green ribbons, who seemed to
be the most determined of his followers, hung growling about the
barricaded door. Something in the gloomy brightness of the room, and
the disorder of the barricaded windows, something in the loneliness of
his figure as he stood there, appealed to me; I even took one step
towards him. But at that moment he looked up, his face grown dark; and
he waved me off with a gesture almost of rage. I knew then that I had
but a small part of his thoughts; and that at this moment, while the
edifice he had built up with so much care and so much risk was
crumbling about him, he was thinking not of us, but of those who had
promised and failed him; who had given good words, and left him to
perish. And I went.

Yet even for that moment of delay it seemed that I might pay too
dearly. A dozen steps brought me to the low-browed door he had
indicated, in the thickness of the wall at the foot of the main
staircase. But already a man was adjusting the last bar. I cried to
him to open. "Open! I must go out!" I cried.

"_Dieu!_ It is too late!" he said, with a dark glance at me.

My heart sank; I feared he was right. Still he began to unbar, though
grudgingly, and in half a minute we had the door loose. With a pistol
in his hand, he opened it on the chain and looked out. It opened on a
narrow passage--which, God be thanked, was still empty. He dropped the
chain, and almost thrust me out, cried, "To the left!" and then, as
dazzled by the sunlight I turned that way, I heard the door slam
behind me and the chain rattle as it was linked again.

The houses that rose on each side somewhat deadened the noise of the
mob and the firing; but as I hurried down the alley, bareheaded and
with the pistol which Froment had given me firmly clutched in my hand,
I heard a fresh spirt of noise behind me, and knew that the assailants
had entered the passage by the farther end; and that had I waited a
moment longer I should have been too late.

As it was, my position was sufficiently forlorn, if it was not
hopeless. Alone and a stranger, without hat or badge, knowing little
of the streets, I might blunder at any corner into the arms of one of
the parties--and be massacred. I had a notion that the church of the
Capuchins was that which I had visited near Madame Catinot's; and my
first thought was to gain the main street leading in that direction.
This was not so easy, however; the alley in which I found myself led
only into a second passage equally strait and gloomy. Entering this, I
turned after a moment's hesitation to the left, but before I had gone
a dozen paces I heard shouting in front of me; and I halted and
retraced my steps. Hurrying in the other direction, I found myself in
a minute in a little gloomy well-like court, with no second outlet
that I could see, where I stood a moment panting and at a loss,
rendered frantic and almost desperate by the thought that, while I
hovered there uncertain, the die might be cast, and those whom I
sought perish for lack of my aid.

I was about to return, resolved to face at all risks the party of
rioters whom I heard behind me, when an open window in the lowest
floor of one of the houses that stood round the court caught my eye.
It was not far from the ground, and to see was to determine; the house
must have an outlet on the street. In a dozen strides I crossed the
court, and resting one hand on the sill of the window, vaulted into
the room, alighted sideways on a stool, and fell heavily to the floor.

I was up in a moment unhurt, but with a woman's scream ringing in my
ears, and a woman, a girl, cowering from me, white-faced, her back to
the door. She had been kneeling, praying probably, by the bed; and I
had almost fallen on her. When I looked she screamed again; I called
to her in heaven's name to be silent.

"The door! Only the door!" I cried. "Show it me. I will hurt no one."

"Who are you?" she muttered. And still shrinking from me, she stared
at me with distended eyes.

"_Mon Dieu!_ What does it matter?" I answered fiercely. "The door,
woman! The door into the street!"

I advanced upon her, and the same fear which had paralysed her gave
her sense again. She opened the door beside her, and pointed dumbly
down a passage. I hurried through the passage, rejoicing at my
success, but before I could unbar the door that I found facing me a
second woman came out of a room at the side, and saw me, and threw up
her hands with a cry of terror.

"Which is the way to the church of the Capuchins?" I said.

She clapped one hand to her side, but she answered. "To the left!" she
gasped. "And then to the right! Are they coming?"

I did not stay to ask whom she meant, but getting the door open at
last I sprang through the doorway. One look up and down the street,
however, and I was in again, and the door closed behind me. My eyes
met the woman's, and without a word she snatched up the bar I had
dropped and set it in the sockets. Then she turned and ran up the
stairs, and I followed her, the girl into whose room I had leapt, and
whose scared face showed for a second at the end of the passage,
disappearing like a rabbit, as we passed her.

I followed the woman to the window of an upper room, and we looked
out, standing back and peering fearfully over the sill. No need, now,
to ask why I had returned so quickly. The roar of many voices seemed
in a moment to fill all the street, while the casement shook with the
tread of thousands and thousands of advancing feet, as, rank after
rank, stretching from wall to wall, the mob, or one section of it,
swept by, the foremost marching in order, shoulder to shoulder, armed
with muskets, and in some kind of uniform, the rearmost a savage
rabble with naked arms and pikes and axes, who looked up at the
windows, and shook their fists and danced and leapt as they went by,
with a great shout of "_Aux Arnes! Aux Arnes!_"

In themselves they were a sight to make a quiet man's blood run chill;
but they had that in their midst, seeing which the woman beside me
clutched my arm and screamed aloud. On six long pikes, raised high
above the mob, moved six severed heads--one, the foremost, bald and
large, and hideously leering. They lifted these to the windows, and
shook their gory locks in sport; and so went by, and in a moment the
street was quiet again.

The woman, trembling in a chair, muttered that they had sacked
La Vierge, the red cabaret, and that the bald head was a
town-councillor's, her neighbour's. But I did not stay to listen. I
left her where she was, and, hurrying down again, unbarred the door
and went out. All was strangely quiet again. The morning sun shone
bright and warm on the long empty street, and seemed to give the lie
to the thing I had seen. Not a living creature was visible this way or
that; not a face at the window. I stood a moment in the middle of the
road, disconcerted; puzzled by the bright stillness, and uncertain
which way I had been going. At last I remembered the woman's
directions, and set off on the heels of the mob, until I reached the
first turning on the right. I took this, and had not gone a hundred
yards before I recognised, a little in front of me, Madame Catinot's
house.

It showed to the sunshine a wide blind front, long rows of shuttered
windows, and not a sign of life. Nevertheless, here was something I
knew, something which wore a semblance of familiarity, and I hailed it
with hope; and, flinging myself on the door, knocked long and
recklessly. The noise seemed fit to wake the dead; it boomed and
echoed in every doorway of the empty street, that on the evening of my
arrival had teemed with traffic; I shivered at the sound--I shivered
standing conspicuous on the steps of the house, expecting a score of
windows to be opened and heads thrust out.

But I had not yet learned how the extremity of panic benumbs; or how
strong is the cowardly instinct that binds the peaceful man to his
hearth when blood flows in the streets. Not a face showed at a
casement, not a door opened; worse, though I knocked again and again,
the house I would awaken remained dead and silent. I stood back and
gazed at it, and returned, and hammered again, thinking this time
nothing of myself.

But without result. Or not quite. Far away at the end of the street
the echo of my knocking dwelt a little, then grew into a fuller,
deeper sound--a sound I knew. The mob was returning.

I cursed my folly then for lingering; thought of the passage in the
rear of the house that led to the church, found the entrance to it,
and in a moment was speeding through it. The distant roar grew nearer
and louder, but now I could see the low door of the church, and I
slackened my pace a little. As I did so the door before me opened, and
a man looked out. I saw his face before he saw me, and read it; saw
terror, shame, and rage written on its mean features; and in some
strange way I knew what he was going to do before he did it. A moment
he glared abroad, blinking and shading his eyes in the sunshine, then
he spied me, slid out, and with an indescribable Judas look at me,
fled away.

He left the door ajar--I knew him in some way for the door-keeper,
deserting his post; and in a moment I was in the church and face to
face with a sight I shall remember while I live; for that which was
passing outside, that which I had seen during the last few minutes,
gave it a solemnity exceeding even that of the strange service I had
witnessed there before.

The sun shut out, a few red altar lamps shed a sombre light on the
pillars and the dim pictures and the vanishing spaces; above all, on a
vast crowd of kneeling women, whose bowed heads and wailing voices as
they chanted the Litany of the Virgin, filled the nave.

There were some, principally on the fringe of the assembly, who rocked
themselves to and fro, weeping silently, or lay still as statues with
their foreheads pressed to the cold stones; whilst others glanced this
way and that with staring eyes, and started at the slightest sound,
and moaned prayers with white lips. But more and more, the passionate
utterance of the braver souls laid bonds on the others; louder and
louder the measured rhythm of "_Ora pro nobis! Ora pro nobis!_" rose
and swelled through the vaults of the roof; more and more fervent it
grew, more and more importunate, wilder the abandonment of
supplication, until--until I felt the tears rise in my throat, and my
breast swell with pity and admiration--and then I saw Denise.

She knelt between her mother and Madame Catinot, nearly in the front
row of those who faced the high altar. Whence I stood, I had a side
view of her face as she looked upward in rapt adoration--that face
which I had once deemed so childish. Now at the thought that she
prayed, perhaps for me--at the thought that this woman so pure and
brave, that though little more than a child, and soft, and gentle, and
maidenly, she could bear herself with no shadow of quailing in this
stress of death--at the thought that she loved me, and prayed for me,
I felt myself more or less than a man. I felt tears rising, I felt my
breast heaving, and then--and then as I went to drop on my knees,
against the great doors on the farther side of the church, came a
thunderous shock, followed by a shower of blows and loud cries for
admittance.

A horrible kind of shudder ran through the kneeling crowd, and here
and there a woman screamed and sprang up and looked wildly round. But
for a few moments the chant still rose monotonously and filled the
building; louder and louder the measured rhythm of "_Ora pro nobis!
Ora pro nobis!_" still rose and fell and rose again with an intensity
of supplication, a pathos of repetition that told of bursting hearts.
At length, however, one of the leaves of the door flew open, and that
proved too much; the sound sent three parts of the congregation
shrieking to their feet--though a few still sang. By this time I was
half way through the crowd, pressing to Denise's side; before I could
reach her the other door gave way, and a dozen men flocked in
tumultuously. I had a glimpse of a priest--afterwards I learnt that it
was Father Benit--standing to oppose them with a cross upraised; and
then, by the dim light, which to them was darkness, I saw--unspeakable
relief--that the intruders were not the leaders of the mob, but
foremost the two St. Alais, blood-stained and black with powder, with
drawn swords and clothes torn; and behind them a score of their
followers.

In their relief women flung themselves on the men's necks, and those
who stood farther away burst into loud sobbing and weeping. But the
men themselves, after securing the doors behind them, began
immediately to move across the church to the smaller exit on the
alley; one crying that all was lost, and another that the east gate
was open, while a third adjured the women to separate--adding that in
the neighbouring houses they would be safe, but that the church would
be sacked; and that even now the Calvinists were bursting in the gates
of the monastery through which the fugitives had retreated, after
being driven out of the Arnes.

All, on the instant, was panic and wailing and confusion. I have heard
it said since that the worst thing the men could have done was to take
the church in their flight, and that had they kept aloof the women
would not have been disturbed; that, as a fact, and in the event, the
church was not sacked. But in such a hell as was Nmes that morning,
with the kennels running blood, and men's souls surprised by sudden
defeat, it was hard to decide what was best; and I blame no one.

A rush for the door followed the man's words. It drove me a little
farther from Denise; but as she and the group round her held back and
let the more timid or selfish go first, I had time to gain her side.
She had drawn the hood of her cloak close round her face, and until I
touched her arm did not see me. Then, without a word, she clung to
me--she clung to me, looking up; I saw her face under the hood, and it
was happy. God! It was happy, even in that scene of terror!

After that, Madame St. Alais, though she greeted me with a bitter
smile, had no power to repel me. "You are quick, Monsieur, to profit
by your victory," she said, in a scathing tone. And that was all.
Unrebuked, I passed my arm round Denise, and followed close on Louis
and Madame Catinot; while Monsieur le Marquis, after speaking with his
mother, followed. As he did so his eye fell on me, but he only smiled,
and to something Madame said, answered aloud, "_Mon Dieu_, Madame;
what does it matter? We have thrown the last stake and lost. Let us
leave the table!"

She dropped her hood over her face; and even in that moment of fear
and excitement I found something tragic in the act, and on a sudden
pitied her. But it was no time for sentiment or pity; the pursuers
were not far behind the pursued. We were still in the church and some
paces from the threshold giving on the alley, when a rush of footsteps
outside the great door behind us made itself heard, and the next
instant the doors creaked under the blows hailed upon them. It was a
question whether they would stand until we were out, and I felt the
slender figure within my arm quiver and press more closely to me. But
they held--they held, and an instant later the crowd before us gave
way, and we were outside in the daylight, in the alley, hurrying
quickly down it towards Madame Catinot's house.

It seemed to me that we were safe then, or nearly safe; so glad was I
to find myself in the open air and out of the church. The ground fell
away a little towards Madame Catinot's, and I could see the line of
hastening heads bobbing along before us, and here and there white
faces turned to look back. The high walls on either hand softened the
noise of the riot. Behind me were M. le Marquis and Madame; and again
behind them three or four of M. le Marquis' followers brought up the
rear. I looked back beyond these and saw that the alley opposite the
church was still clear, and that the pursuers had not yet passed
through the church; and I stooped to whisper a word of comfort to
Denise. I stooped perhaps longer than was necessary, for before I was
aware of it I found myself stumbling over Louis' heels. A backward
wave sweeping up the alley had brought him up short and flung him
against me. With the movement, as we all jostled one another, there
arose far in front and rolled up the passage between the high walls a
sound of misery; a mingling of groans and screams and wailing such as
I hope I may never hear again. Some strove furiously to push their way
back towards the church, and some, not understanding what was amiss,
to go forwards, and some fell, and were trodden under foot; and for a
few seconds the long narrow alley heaved and seethed in an agony of
panic.

Engaged in saving Denise from the crush and keeping her on her feet, I
did not, for a moment, understand. The first thought I had was that
the women--three out of four were women--had gone mad or given way to
a shameful, selfish terror. Then, as our company staggering and
screaming rolled back upon us, until it filled but half the length of
the passage, I heard in front a roar of cruel laughter, and saw over
the intervening heads a serried mass of pike-points filling the end of
the passage opposite Madame Catinot's house. Then I understood. The
Calvinists had cut us off; and my heart stood still.

For there was no retreat. I looked behind me, and saw the alley by the
church-porch choked with men who had reached it through the church;
alive with harsh mocking faces, and scowling eyes, and cruel thirsty
pikes. We were hemmed in; in the long high walls, which it was
impossible to scale, was no door or outlet short of Madame Catinot's
house--and that was guarded. And before and behind us were the pikes.

I dream of that scene sometimes; of the sunshine, hot and bright, that
lay ghastly on white faces distorted with fear; of women fallen on
their knees and lifting hands this way and that; of others screaming
and uttering frenzied prayers, or hanging on men's necks; of the long
writhing line of humanity, wherein fear, showing itself in every
shape, had its way; above all of the fiendish jeers and laughter of
the victors, as they cried to the men to step out, or hurled vile
words at the women.

Even Nmes, mother of factions, parent of a hundred quarterless
brawls, never saw a worse scene, or one more devilish. For a few
seconds in the surprise of this trap, in the sudden horror of finding
ourselves, when all seemed well, at grips with death, I could only
clutch Denise to me tighter and tighter, and hide her eyes on my
breast, as I leaned against the wall and groaned with white lips. O
God, I thought, the women! The women! At such a time a man would give
all the world that there might be none, or that he had never loved
one.

St. Alais was the first to recover his presence of mind and act--if
that could be called action which was no more than speech, since we
were hopelessly enmeshed and outnumbered. Putting Madame behind him he
waved a white kerchief to the men by the door of the church--who stood
about thirty paces from us--and adjured them to let the women pass;
even taunting them when they refused, and gibing at them as cowards,
who dared not face the men unencumbered.

But they only answered with jeers and threats, and savage laughter.
"No, no, M. le Prtre!" they cried. "No, no! Come out and taste steel!
Then, perhaps, we will let the women go! Or perhaps not!"

"You cowards!" he cried.

But they only brandished their arms and laughed, shrieking: "_A bas
les tratres! A bas les prtres!_ Stand out! Stand out, Messieurs!"
they continued, "or we will come and pluck you from the women's
skirts!"

He glowered at them in unspeakable rage. Then a man on their side
stepped out and stilled the tumult. "Now listen!" said this fellow, a
giant, with long black hair falling over a tallowy face. "We will give
you three minutes to come out and be piked. Then the women shall go.
Skulk there behind them, and we fire on all, and their blood be on
your heads."

St. Alais stood speechless. At last, "You are fiends!" he cried in a
voice of horror. "Would you kill us before their eyes?"

"Ay, or in their laps!" the man retorted, amid a roar of laughter. "So
decide, decide!" he continued, dancing a clumsy step and tossing a
half-pike round his head. "Three minutes by the clock there! Come out,
or we fire on all! It will be a dainty pie! A dainty Catholic pie,
Messieurs!"

St. Alais turned to me, his face white, his eyes staring; and he tried
to speak. But his voice failed.

And then, of what happened next I cannot tell; for, for a minute, all
was blurred. I remember only how the sun lay hot on the wall beyond
his face, and how black the lines of mortar showed between the old
thin Roman bricks. We were about twenty men and perhaps fifty women,
huddled together in a space some forty yards long. Groans burst from
the men's lips, and such as had women in their arms--and they were
many--leaned against the wall and tried to comfort them, and tried to
put them from them. One man cried curses on the dogs who would murder
us, and shook his fists at them; and some rained kisses on the pale
senseless faces that lay on their breasts--for, thank God, many of the
women had fainted; while others, like St. Alais, looked mute agony
into eyes that told it again, or clasped a neighbour's hand, and
looked up into a sky piteously blue and bright. And I--I do not know
what I did, save look into Denise's eyes and look and look! There was
no senselessness in them.

Remember that the sun shone on all this, and the birds twittered and
chirped in the gardens beyond the walls; that it wanted an hour or two
of high noon, a southern noon; that in the crease of the valley the
Rhone sparkled between its banks, and not far off the sea broke
rippling and creaming on the shore of Les Bouches; that all nature
rejoiced, and only we--we, pent between those dreadful walls, those
scowling faces, saw death imminent--black death shutting out all
things.

A hand touched me; it was St. Alais' hand. I think, nay, I know,
for I read it in his face, that he meant to be reconciled to me.
But when I turned to him--or it may be it was the sight of his
sister's speechless misery moved him--he had another thought. As the
black-haired giant called "One minute gone!" and his following howled,
M. le Marquis threw up his hand.

"Stay!" he cried, with the old gesture of command. "Stay! There is
one man here who is not of us! Let him pass first, and go!" And he
pointed to me. "He has no part with us. I swear it!"

A roar of cruel laughter was the answer. Then, "He that is not with me
is against me!" the giant quoted impiously. And they jeered again.

On that, I take no credit for what I did. In such moments of
exaltation men are not accountable, and, for another thing, I knew
that they would not listen, that I risked nothing. And trembling with
rage I flung back their words. "I am against you!" I cried. "I would
rather die here with these, than live with you! You stain the earth!
You pollute the air! You are fiends----"

No more, for with a shrill laugh the man next me, a mere lad,
half-witted, I think, and the same who had cursed them, sprang by me
and rushed on the pike-points. Half a dozen met in his breast before
our eyes--before our eyes--and with a wild scream he flung up his arms
and was borne back against the side-wall dead and gushing blood.

Instinctively I had covered Denise's face that she might not see. And
it was well; for at that--there was a kind of mercy in it, and let me
tell it quickly--the wretches tasting blood broke loose, and rushed on
us. I saw St. Alais thrust his mother behind him, and almost with the
same movement fling himself on the pikes; and I, pushing Denise down
into the angle of the wall--though she clung to me and prayed to
me--killed the first that came at me with Froment's pistol, and the
next also, with the other barrel at point blank distance--feeling no
fear, but only passion and rage. The third bore me down with his pike
fixed in my shoulder, and for a moment I saw only the sky, and his
scowling face black against it; and shut my eyes, expecting the blow
that must follow.

But none did follow. Instead a weight fell on me, and I began to
struggle, and a whole battle, it seemed to me, was fought over me--in
that horrible slaughterhouse alley, where they dragged men from
women's arms, and forced them, screaming, to the wall, and stabbed
them to death without pity; and things were done of which I dare not
tell!




                             CHAPTER XXV.

                          BEYOND THE SHADOW.


I thank Heaven that I saw little more than I have told. A score of
feet trampled on me as the murderers stumbled this way and that,
and bruised me and covered me with blood that was not my own. And I
heard screams of men in the death-throe, ear-piercing shrieks of
women--shrieks that chilled the blood and stopped the breath--mad
laughter, sounds of the pit. But to rise was to court instant death,
and, though I had no hope and no looking forward, my momentary passion
had spent itself and I lay quiet. Resistance was useless.

At last I thought the end had come. The body that pressed on me, and
partly hid me, was abruptly dragged away; the light came to my eyes,
and a voice cried, briskly: "Here is another! He is alive!"

I staggered to my feet, stupidly willing to die with some sort of
dignity. The speaker was a stranger, but by his side was Buton, and
beyond him stood De Gol; and there were others, all staring at me,
face beyond face. Still, I could not believe that I was saved. "If you
are going to do it, do it quickly," I muttered; and I opened my arms.

"God forbid!" Buton answered hurriedly. "Enough has been done already,
and too much! M. le Vicomte, lean on me! Lean on me, and come this
way. _Mon Dieu_, I was only just in time. If they had killed you----"

"That is the fifth," said De Gol.

Buton did not answer, but taking my arm, gently urged me along, and De
Gol taking the other side, I walked between them, through a lane of
people who stared at me with a sort of brutish wonder--a lane of
people with faces that looked strangely white in the sunshine. I was
bareheaded, and the sun dazzled and confused me, but obeying the
pressure of Buton's hand I swerved and passed through a door that
seemed to open in the wall. As I did so I dropped a kerchief which
some one had given me to bind up my shoulder. A man standing beside
the door, the last man on the right-hand side of the lane of people,
picked it up and gave it to me with a kindly alacrity. He had a pike,
and his hands were covered with blood, and I do not doubt that he was
one of the murderers!

Two men were carrying some one into the house before us, and at the
sight of the helpless body and hanging head, sense and memory returned
to me with a rush. I caught Buton by the breast of his coat and shook
him--shook him savagely. "Mademoiselle de St. Alais!" I cried. "What
have you done to her, wretch? If you have----"

"Hush, Monsieur, hush," he answered reproachfully. "And be yourself.
She is safe, and here, I give you my word. She was carried in among
the first. I don't think a hair of her head is injured."

"She was carried in here?" I said.

"Yes, M. le Vicomte."

"And safe?"

"Yes, yes."

I believe that at that I burst into tears not altogether unmanly; for
they were tears of thankfulness and gratitude. I had gone through very
much, and, though the wound in my arm was a trifle, I had lost some
blood; and the tears may be forgiven me. Nor indeed was I alone in
weeping that day. I learned afterwards that one of the very murderers,
a man who had been foremost in the work, cried bitterly when he came
to himself and saw what he had done.

They killed in Nmes on that day and the two next, about three hundred
men, principally in the Capuchin convent--which Froment had used as a
printing-office, and made the headquarters of his propaganda--in the
Cabaret Rouge, and in Froment's own house, which held out until they
brought cannon to bear on it. Not more than one-half of these fell in
actual conflict or hot blood; the remainder were hunted down in lanes
and houses and hiding-places, and killed where they were found, or,
surrendering at discretion, were led to the nearest wall, and there
shot.

Later, both in Paris and the provinces, this severity was commended,
and held up to admiration as the truest mercy; on the ground that it
stamped out the fire of revolt which was on the point of blazing up
and prevented it spreading to the rest of France. But, looking back, I
find in it another thing; I find in it not mercy, but the first, or
nearly the first, instance of that strange contempt of human life
which marked the Revolution in its later stages; of that extravagance
of cruelty which three years afterwards paralysed society and
astounded the world, and, by the horrible excesses into which it
occasionally led men, proved to the philosophers of the Human Race
that France in the last days of the eighteenth century could do in the
daylight, at Arras and Nantes and Paris, deeds which the tyrants of
old confined to the dark recesses of their torture-chambers: deeds--I
blush to say it--that no other polite country has matched in this age.

But with these crimes--and be it understood I do not refer here to the
work of the guillotine--I thank God that I have at this time nothing
to do. They left their traces on later pages of my life--as on the
life of what Frenchman have they not?--and some day I may revert to
them. But my task here barely touches them. It is enough for me to say
that of eighteen men who shared with me the horrors of the alley by
the Capuchins, four only lived to tell the tale, and look back on the
walls of Nmes; they and I owing our lives in part to the timely
arrival of Buton and some foreign representatives, who did not share
the Cevennols' fanaticism, and partly to the late relenting of the
murderers themselves.

Of the four, Father Benit and Louis St. Alais were two, and strange
was the meeting, when we three, so wonderfully preserved, with clothes
still torn and disordered, and faces splashed with blood, came
together in the upstairs _salon_ at Madame Catinot's. The shutters of
the room, with the exception of one high corner shutter, were still
closed; dead ashes lay white and cold in the empty fire-place, that
had blazed so cheerfully in my honour the night I supped with Madame
Catinot. The whole room was gloomy and chill, the furniture cast long
shadows, and up the stairs came the clamour of the mob, that having
seen us into the house eddied curiously round the scene of the murder,
and could not have enough of it.

A strange meeting, for we three had all loved one another, and by
stress of the times had been separated. Now we met as from the grave,
ghostly figures, livid, trembling, with shaking hands and eyes burning
with the light of fever; but with all differences purged away. "My
Brother!" "Your Brother!" and Louis' hands met mine, as if the dead
man who had died with the courage of his race joined them; while
Father Benit wrung his hands in uncontrollable grief or walked the
room, crying: "My poor children! Oh, my poor children! God have mercy
on this land!"

A low sound of women's voices, and weeping, with the hurrying of feet
going softly to and fro, came from the next room: and that it was, I
think, that presently calmed us, so that except for an occasional
burst of grief on Louis' part we could talk quietly. I learned that
Madame St. Alais lay there, sadly injured in the _mle_, either by
her fall or a blow from a foot; and that Denise and Madame Catinot and
a surgeon were with her. The very room in its gloom was funereal, and
we talked in whispers--and then sank into silence; or again one or
other would rise with a shudder of remembrance, and walk the room with
heaving breast. Presently, the sound of guns coming to our ears, we
forgot ourselves for a while and talked of Froment, and what chance of
escape he had, and listened and heard the mob raving and howling as it
surged by; and then talked again. But always as men who were no longer
concerned; as men whom death had released from the common obligations.

Presently they came and called Louis, who went to his mother; and then
after another interval Father Benit was summoned, and I walked the
room alone. Silence after so great commotion, solitude, when an hour
before I had dealt death and faced it in that inferno, safety after
danger so imminent, all stirred the depths of my heart. When, in
addition, I thought of St. Alais' death, and recalled the brilliant
promise, the daring, the brightness of that haughty spirit now for
ever quenched, I felt the tears rise again. I paced the room in
uncontrollable emotion, and was thankful for the gloom that allowed me
to give it vent. Old times, old scenes, old affections rose up, and my
boyhood; I remembered that we had played together, I forgot that we
had gone different ways.

After a long time, a long, long time, when evening had nearly come,
Louis came in to me. "Will you come?" he said abruptly.

"To Madame St. Alais?"

"Yes, she wants to see you," he replied, holding the door open, and
speaking in the dull even tone of one who knows all.

After such a scene as we had passed through comes reaction; I was worn
out and I went with him mechanically, thinking rather of the past than
the present. But no sooner was I over the threshold of the next room,
which, unlike that I had left, was brilliantly lit by candles set in
sconces, the shutters being closed, than I came to myself with a
shock. Propped up with pillows on a bed opposite the door, so that I
met her eyes and had a full view of her face as I entered, lay Madame
St. Alais; and I stood. Her face was white with a red spot burning in
each cheek; her eyes matched the colour in brilliance; but it was
neither of these things that brought me up suddenly, nor--though I
noticed it with foreboding--the way in which she plucked at the
coverlet when she spoke. It was something in her expression; something
so unfitting the occasion, so bizarre and light that I stood appalled.

She saw my hesitation, and in a gay and slightly affected tone, that
in a moment told the story, a tone more dreadful under the
circumstances than the most pathetic outbursts, she reproached me with
it. "Welcome, M. le Vicomte," she said. "And yet I am glad to see that
you have some modesty. We will not be hard on you, however. A late
repentance is better than none, and--where is my fan, Denise? Child,
my fan!"

Denise rose with a choking sound from her seat by the bed, and must, I
think, have broken down; we had all nerves worn to the last thread.
But Madame Catinot saved the situation. Hastily reaching a fan from a
side table she laid a firm hand on the younger woman's shoulder as she
passed, and gently pressed her back into her seat.

"Thank you, my dear," Madame St. Alais said, playing an instant with
the fan, and smiling from side to side, as I had seen her smile a
hundred times in her _salon_. "And now, M. le Vicomte," she continued
with ghastly archness, "I think that you will have the grace to say
that I was a true prophet?"

I muttered something, heaven knows what; the scene, with Madame's
smiling face, and the others' bowed shoulders and averted eyes, was
dreadful.

"I never doubted that you would have to join us," she went on, with
complacency. "And if I were cruel, I should have much to say. But as
you have returned to your allegiance before it was too late, we will
let bygones be bygones. His Majesty is so good that--but where are the
others? We cannot proceed without them."

She looked round with a touch of her native peremptoriness. "Where is
M. de Gontaut?" she said. "Louis, has not M. de Gontaut arrived? He
promised to be here to witness the contract."

Louis, from his place by one of the closed windows, where he stood
with Father Benit and the surgeon, answered in a strained voice that
he had not yet arrived.

Madame seemed to find something unnatural in his tone and our
attitude, she looked uneasily from one to the other of us. "There is
nothing the matter, is there?" she said, flirting her fan more
vigorously. "Nothing has happened?"

"No, no, Madame," Louis answered, striving to soothe her. "Doubtless
he will be here by-and-by."

But a shadow of anxiety still clouded Madame's face. "And Victor?" she
said. "He has not come either? Louis, are you sure that there is
nothing the matter?"

"Madame, Madame, you will see him presently," he answered with a
half-stifled sob; and he turned away with a gesture of horror, which,
but for one of the curtains of the alcove, she must have seen.

She did not, though there was enough in this to arouse a sane person's
suspicions. As he spoke, however, Madame's eyes fell on me, and the
piteous anxiety which had for the moment darkened her face, passed
away as quickly as the shadow of a cloud passes on an April morning.
She took up her fan again, and looked at me gaily. "Do you know," she
said, "I had the strangest dream last night, M. le Vicomte--or was it
when I was ill, Denise? Never mind. But I dreamed all sorts of
horrors; that our house here was burned, and the house at Cahors, and
that we had to fly and take refuge at Montauban, and then--I think it
was at Nmes. And that M. de Gontaut was murdered, and all the
_canaille_ were up in arms! As if--as if," she continued, with a
little laugh, cut short by a gasp of pain, "the King would permit such
things, or they were possible. And there was something--something
still more absurd about the Church." She paused, knitting her brows;
and then with a touch of her fan dismissing the subject: "But I
forget--I forget. And just when it was most horrible I awoke. It was
all absurd. So extravagant you would all be ill with laughing if I
could remember it. I fancied that a pair of red-heeled shoes were as
good as a death warrant, and powder and patches condemned you at
once."

She paused. The fan dropped from her hand, and she looked round
uneasily. "I think--I think I am not quite well yet," she said in a
different tone, and a spasm crossed her face--it was plain that she
was in pain. "Louis!" she continued petulantly, "where is the notary?
He might read the contract. Doubtless Victor and M. de Gontaut will be
here before long. Where is he?" she continued sharply.

It is easy to say that we might have played our parts; but the pity
and the horror of it, falling on hearts already tortured by the scenes
of the day, fairly unmanned us. Denise hid her face, and trembled so
that the chair on which she sat shook; and Louis turned away
shuddering, while I stood near the foot of the bed, frozen into
silence. This time it was the surgeon, a thin young man of dark
complexion, who put himself forward.

"The papers are in the next room, Madame," he said gravely.

"But you are not M. Pettifer?" she answered querulously.

"No, Madame, he was so unwell as to be unable to leave the house."

"He has no right to be unwell," Madame retorted severely. "Pettifer
unwell, and Mademoiselle St. Alais' contract to be signed! But you
have the papers?"

"In the next room, Madame."

"Fetch them! Fetch them!" she answered, her eyes wandering uneasily
from one to another. And she moved in the bed and sighed as one in
pain. Then, "Where is Victor? Why does he not come?" she asked
impatiently.

"I think I hear him," Louis said suddenly. It was the first time he
had spoken of his own free will, and I caught a new sound in his
voice. "I will see," he went on, and moving to the door he gave me a
sign, as he passed, to follow him.

I muttered something, and did so. In the room in which I had waited,
the half-shuttered room of gloom and shadows, from which Louis had
fetched me, we found the surgeon groping hastily about. "Some paper,
Monsieur," he said, looking up impatiently as we entered. "Some paper!
Almost anything should do."

"Stay!" Louis said, his voice harsh with pain. "We have had too much
of this--this mockery. I will have no more."

"Monsieur?"

"I say I will have no more!" Louis answered fiercely, a sob in his
throat. "Tell her the truth."

"She would not believe it."

"At any rate, anything is better than this."

"Do you mean it, Monsieur?" the surgeon asked slowly, and he looked at
him.

"I do."

"Then I will have no part in it," the man answered with gravity. "I
acquit myself of all responsibility. Nor shall you do it, Monsieur,
until you have heard what the inevitable result will be."

"My mother cannot recover," Louis said stubbornly.

"No, Monsieur, nor will she live, in my opinion, more than a few
hours. When the fever that now supports her begins to wane she will
collapse, and die. It depends on you whether she closes her eyes,
knowing none of the evil that has happened, or her son's death; or
dies----"

"It is horrible!"

"It is for you to choose," the surgeon answered inexorably.

Louis looked round. "There is paper there," he said suddenly.

I suppose that we had been absent from the room no more than a couple
of minutes, but when we returned we found Madame St. Alais calling
impatiently for us and for Victor. "Where is he? Where is he?" she
repeated feverishly. "Why is he late to-day of all days? There is
no--no quarrel between you?" And she looked jealously at me.

"None, Madame," I said, with tears in my voice. "That I swear!"

"Then why is he not here? And M. de Gontaut?" Her eyes were still
bright; the red spot burned still in her cheeks; but her features had
taken a pinched look, she was changed, and her fingers were never
still. Her voice had grown harsh and unnatural, and from time to time
she looked round with a piteous expression as if something puzzled
her. "I am not well to-day," she muttered presently, with a painful
effort to be herself. "And I forget to be as gay as I should be.
Mademoiselle, go to M. le Vicomte, and say something pretty to amuse
us while we wait. And you, M. le Vicomte! In my young days it was
usual for the _fianc_ to salute his mistress on these occasions. Fie
on you! For shame, Monsieur! I am afraid that you are a laggard in
love."

Denise rose, and came slowly to me before them all, but no word passed
her pale lips, and she did not raise her eyes to mine. She remained
passive when in accordance with Madame's permission I stooped and
kissed her cold cheek; it grew no warmer, her eyes did not kindle. Yet
I was satisfied, more than satisfied; for as I leant over her I felt
her little hands--little hands I longed to take in mine and shelter
and protect--I felt them clutch and hold the front of my coat, as the
child clings to its mother's neck. I passed my arm round her before
them all, and so we stood at the foot of Madame's bed, and she looked
at us.

She laughed gaily. "Poor little mouse!" she said. "She is shy yet. Be
good to her, _mon cher_, she is a tender morsel, and--I don't feel
well! I don't feel well," Madame repeated, abruptly breaking off, and
lifting herself in bed, while one hand went with difficulty to her
head. "I don't--what is it?" she continued, the colour visibly fading
from her face and leaving it white and drawn, while fear leapt into
her staring eyes. "What is it? Fetch--fetch some one, will you?
The--the doctor! And Victor."

Denise slipped from my arm, and flew to her side. I stood a moment,
then the surgeon touched my arm. "Go!" he muttered. "Go. Leave her to
the women. It will be quickly over."

And so Madame St. Alais gave Mademoiselle to me at last; and the
compact for our marriage, into which she had entered so many years
before with my dead father, was fulfilled.

                          *   *   *   *   *

Madame died next morning, being taken not only from the evil to come,
but from that which was then present, and roared and eddied through
the streets of Nmes round the unburied body of her son; for she died
without awaking from the delirium which followed her hurt. I went in
to see her lying dead and little changed; and in the quiet decorum of
the lighted chamber I thought reverently of the change which one
year--one brief year had made, coming at the end of fifty years of
prosperity. It seemed pitiful to me then, as I stooped and kissed the
waxen hand--very pitiful; now, knowing what the future had in store,
remembering the twenty years of exile and poverty and tedium and hope
deferred, that were to be the lot of so many of her friends, of so
many of those who had graced her _salons_ at St. Alais and Cahors, I
think her happy. Possessed of energy as well as pride, a rare
combination in our order, she and hers dared greatly and greatly lost;
staked all and lost all. Yet better that, than the prison or the
guillotine; or growing old and decrepit in a strange land, to return
to a _patrie_ that had long forgotten them; that stood in the roads
and jeered at the old berlins and petticoats and headgear that were
the fashion in the days of the Polignacs.

I have said that the riots in Nmes lasted three days. On the last
Buton came to me and told us we must go; that to avoid worse things we
must leave the city without delay, or he and the more moderate party
who had saved us would no longer be responsible. On this, Louis was
for retiring to Montpellier, and thence to the _migrs_ at Turin; and
for a few hours I was of the same mind, desiring most of all to place
the women in safety.

I owe it to Buton that I did not take a step hard to recall, and of
which I am sure that I should have repented later. He asked me bluntly
whither I was going, and when I told him, set his back against the
door. "God forbid!" he said. "Who go, go. Few will return."

I answered him with heat. "Nonsense!" I cried. "I tell you, within a
year you will be on your knees to us to come back."

"Why?" he said.

"You cannot keep order without us!"

"With ease," he answered coolly.

"Look at the state of things here!"

"It will pass."

"But who will govern?"

"The fittest," he replied doggedly. "For do you still think, M. le
Vicomte--after all that has happened--that a man to make laws must
have a title--saving your presence? Do you still think that the wheat
will not grow, nor the hens lay eggs, unless the Seigneur's shadow
falls on them? Do you think that to fight, a man must have powder on
his head as well as in his musket?"

"I think," I retorted, "that when a man who does not know the sea
turns pilot it is time to leave the vessel!"

"The pilot will learn," he answered. "And for quitting the vessel, let
those go who have no business on board. Be guided, Monseigneur," he
continued in a different tone. "Be guided. They have killed in Nmes
three hundred in three days."

"And you say, stay?"

"Ay, for there is blood between us," he answered grimly. "That has
been done now which will not easily be forgiven; that has been done
which will abide. Go abroad after this--and stay abroad! Or rather do
not--do not, but be guided," he continued, with rough emotion in his
voice. "Go home to the Chteau, and be quiet, Monsieur, and no one
will harm you."

There was much in what he said. At any rate, I thought the advice so
good that, after some hesitation, I not only determined to follow it,
but I gave it to the others. But Louis would not change his mind. A
horror of the country had seized him since his escape; and he would
go. He raised no opposition, however, when I asked him to give me
Denise; and within twenty-four hours of her mother's death she became
my wife, in that dark-shuttered house by the Capuchins' alley, Father
Benit performing the service. Louis was at the same time married to
Madame Catinot, who was to share his exile. Needless to say there were
no rejoicings at these weddings; no _fte_ and no joy-bells, and no
bride-clothes, but sobs and wailings, and cold lips and passive hands.

But a bright day has sometimes a weeping dawn, and though for three
years or more our life knew perils enough and some sorrows--the story
of which I may one day tell--and we shared the lot of all Frenchmen in
those times of shame and stress, I had never, no, not for a day or an
hour, cause to repent the deed done so hurriedly at Nmes. Clinging
hands and warm lips, eyes that shone as brightly in a prison as a
palace, cheered me, when things were worst; and when better days came,
and with them grey hairs and a new France, my wife found means still
to grace, and ever more and more to share my life.

One word of the man to whom under God I owe it that I won her. He
survived, but I never saw Froment of Nmes again. On the third day of
the riots cannon were brought to bear on his tower, it was stormed,
and the garrison were put to the sword, one man only, I believe,
escaping with his life. That man was Froment, the indomitable, the
most capable leader that the Royalists of France ever boasted. He got
safely to the frontier and thence to Turin, where he was received with
honour by those whose aid might a little earlier have saved all. Who
fails must expect buffets, however; the cold shoulder was presently
turned to him; he was slighted, and as the years went on his
complaints grew louder. Once I sought to find and assist him, but he
was then engaged in some enterprise on the African coast, and my
circumstances were such that I could have done little had I found him.
Soon afterwards, I believe, he died, though certain information never
reached me. But dead or alive I owe him gratitude, respect, and other
things, among which I count the greatest happiness of my life.




                               THE END.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Red Cockade, by Stanley J. Weyman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RED COCKADE ***

***** This file should be named 39297-8.txt or 39297-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/9/2/9/39297/

Produced by Charles Bowen, from page scans provided by the
Web Archive (University of Toronto)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
